6 کے 


ANB aN ta 


EE‏ ا E‏ ج ا 
Fi ALE tel; An‏ 4 


1 } 5 5 2 a 
4 2 kl اا‎ Lala 1ل‎ 
a 
Zz ٣ 1 
کا‎ EES 
(E | ES E 2 
د اا ی‎ 0 


E E لە‎ 
a 


٠ 2 E ا‎ 

i 1 e ا‎ > 

f Ag‏ ا وب إل 0 و ق ا 
ا 


r ج‎ 
ET a4 


E N ا‎ 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


BLOOMSBURY EGYPTOLOGY 
Series editor: Nicholas Reeves 


Burial Customs in Ancient Egypt 
Wolfram Grajetzki 


Court Officials of the Egyptian Middle Kingdom 
Wolfram Grajetzki 


Hidden Hands: Egyptian workforces in Petrie 
excavation archives, 1880-1924 
Stephen Quirke 


The Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt: 
history, archaeology and society 
Wolfram Grajetzki 


Performance and Drama in Ancient Egypt 


Robyn Gillam 


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN 
TECHNOLOGY 
AND INNOVATION 


Transformations in Pharaonic 
Material Culture 


Ian Shaw 


Bloomsbury Academic 
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 


B LOOM SS B U RY 


LONDON ۰‘ NEW DELHI ‘° NEW YORK ° SYDNEY 


Bloomsbury Academic 
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 


50 Bedford Square 1385 Broadway 
London New York 
WCI1IB 3DP NY 10018 
UK USA 
www.bloomsbury.com 


BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 


First published in 2012 by Bristol Classical Press 
an imprint of Bloomsbury Academic 


Reprinted by Bloomsbury Academic 2013 
© Ian Shaw, 2012 


Ian Shaw has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work. 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information 
storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers. 


No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining 
from action as a result of the material in this publication can be 


accepted by Bloomsbury or the author. 


British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 


ISBN: PB:  978-0-7156-3118-8 
ePDF: 978-1-4725-1959-7 
ePub: 978-1-4725-1960-3 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 


Series: Bloomsbury Egyptology 


Typeset by Ray Davies 


110 


127 
151 


157 
160 
163 
167 
169 
191 
199 
200 


Contents 


Preface 
Acknowledgements 
List of illustrations 


Chronology 


1. Introduction: towards an explicitly anthropological analysis 
of technological change and innovation in ancient Egypt 
2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics: was Egyptian 
technology underpinned and framed by ‘science’? 
3. Writing: human communication as social technology 
4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy: the fusion of science and art 
5. Stone-working: the synthesis of traditional chaînes opératoires 
and ideological innovations 
6. Mummification and glass-working: issues of definition 
and process 
7. Chariot production: technical choice and socio-political 
change 
8. Military hardware: the east Mediterranean knowledge 
economy and the emergence of the Iron Age in Egypt 
9. Technology embedded in urban society: finding the 
individual in the general 
10. Conclusions 


Appendix 1. Measuring space 
Appendix 2. Measuring time 
Appendix 3. Astronomy and astrology 
Abbreviations 
Bibliography 
Index 

Ancient Egyptian terms 

Assyrian terms 


This book is dedicated to Barry Kemp, Janine Bourriau and John 
Ray, who taught me Egyptian archaeology, texts and material 
culture in the 1980s, and have continued to inspire me with their 
work ever since. 


Vi 


Preface 


My overall approach in this book is similar to that of Serafina Cuomo 
in her recent study of technology and culture in the Greco-Roman 
world (Cuomo 2007); thus, my initial discussions of the general sources 
and problems of science and technology in Egypt (in the first three 
chapters) are followed by a series of case-studies seeking to understand 
certain aspects of the dynamics of ancient Egyptian technology, culture 
and society. The case-studies deal with various specific technical 
areas: medicine, writing, stone-working, monumental construction, 
mummification, glass-working, and weapons manufacture. Like Cuomo 
(2007: 5), I have tried to organise each chapter around one or more 
areas of debate, using particular technological topics to provide more 
general theoretical insights into the cultural dynamics of technology and 
innovation in ancient Egypt. 

Although the principal aim of this book is to bring together the basic 
evidence for many different aspects of change and evolution in Egyptian 
technology, it will also include some consideration of the wider cognitive 
and social contexts. What was the Egyptian propensity for mental 
creativity and innovation? How rapidly did Egyptian technology change 
in comparison with other African, Mediterranean or Near Eastern states? 
The various chapters will include consideration of those aspects of 
Egyptian society that made it predisposed (or, in other instances, actively 
opposed) to certain types of conservatism or innovation in material 
culture. Examples are also given of the idea that technological change 
is not necessarily a continuous succession of innovations — it can also 
involve maintaining the status quo or even entirely viable and justifiable 
reversions to earlier techniques and equipment. The penultimate chapter 
is a discussion of the ways in which the practice and development of 
Egyptian technology interrelated with Late Bronze Age urban society as 
a whole, using the city at Amarna as a case-study. 


vii 


Acknowledgements 


I would like to thank Nick Reeves for initiating this book, and Deborah 
Blake for ensuring that it finally appeared. I would also like to thank 
over ten years of Liverpool University undergraduate and postgraduate 
students for helping to maintain my enthusiasm for ancient Egyptian 
technology and material culture. Thanks to Ann for several of the line 
drawings. 

Parts of Chapters 7, 8 and 9 have previously appeared as Shaw 2001, 
2010b, and 2004 respectively. 


viii 


10 


17 


20 


List of Illustrations 


Figures 


Lower Palaeolithic handaxe from the desert near Thebes; this 
artefact is typical of the earliest phase of tool use in the Nile 
Valley, c. 400,000-300,000 BP (Garstang Museum, University of 
Liverpool, E6581). 

Bird’s eye view of a ground loom, from the Middle Kingdom tomb 
of Khnumhotep III (BH3) at Beni Hasan (after Newberry 1893: 
Pl. XX). 

Protodynastic figurine of a baboon in efforescence-glazed faience, 
holding a cone on its knee, from Hierakonpolis, h. 52mm 
(courtesy of the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, 
University College London, UC11002). 

Scene from the tomb of Ty at Saqqara (no. 60), showing a potter 
using a wheel to fashion a vessel (Nicholson and Shaw 2000: fig. 
5.3). 

Vertical looms depicted in the 18th-Dynasty tomb of Thutnefer at 
Thebes (no. A6) (TT104; after Davies 1929: 234, fig. 1). 

Blue and yellow core-formed glass vessel probably dating to the 
reign of Thutmose III, one of the earliest examples of worked 
glass in Egypt. (Harrow School, HE121; photo: IS) 

Scene showing a carpenter turning wood on a lathe, in the early 
Ptolemaic tomb of Petosiris at Tuna el-Gebel (Nicholson and 
Shaw 2000: fig. 15.21) 

Problem no. 10 in the Moscow mathematical papyrus, showing the 
method for calculating the area of a semi-circle (after Peet 1931: 
Pl. XIID). 

Problem no. 57 in the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus: the height of 
a pyramid is calculated from the base-length and the skd (slope) 
(after Chace et al. 1929: pl. 79). 


1.1. 


1.2. 


1:3; 


1.4. 


1.5. 


1.6. 


1.7. 


E 


2:2: 


29 


30 


33 


48 


53 


57 


58 


60 


63 


67 


70 


72 


74 


81 


List of Illustrations 


. Inscribed labels from tomb U-j at Abydos, c. 3200 BC (courtesy of 


G. Dreyer, German Institute of Archaeology in Cairo). 

A selection of five potmarks on Middle Kingdom Marl-C storage 
jars from Quartz Ridge, Gebel el-Asr (photo: IS). 

Cuneiform letter from Amarna, written by Tushratta, ruler of 
Mitanni, to Amenhotep III of Egypt, 18th Dynasty, c. 1360 BC 
(photo: IS). 


. One of the wooden funerary stelae of Hesyra, a medical official in 


the reign of the 3rd-Dynasty ruler Djoser (Cairo, JE28504; photo: 
IS). 

Relief depiction of surgical instruments on the inner face of the 
enclosure wall of the temple of Horus-the-elder and Sobek at 
Kom Ombo, dating to the Roman period (photo: IS). 


. Scene in the 12th-Dynasty tomb of Amenemhat at Beni Hasan 


(BH2) showing flint knives being produced (after Griffith 1896: 
Pl. VD. 
Scene of butchery in the 5Sth-Dynasty tomb of Ptahhotep at 
Saqqara (after Junker 1953: Abb. 88a). 
Flint “fishtail knife’, dating to the Predynastic period, from 
Hierakonpolis (Garstang Museum, University of Liverpool, 
E6560). 
Scene showing workers drilling out the interiors of stone vessels 
(and also a stone sculptor), on the west wall of room A in the 
12th-Dynasty tomb of Pepyankh at Meir (after Blackman 1953: 
Pl. XVID. 
The inscribed tip of an unfinished obelisk of Seti I at the Gebel 
Gulab quartzite quarries (photo: courtesy of Elizabeth Bloxam). 
Granite door-jamb from Hierakonpolis, dating to the reign of the 
2nd-Dynasty king Khasekhemwy (Cairo, JE 33896; c. 2650 BC, 
see Engelbach 1934; photo: 1S). 
The remains of a mud-brick construction ramp against the inner face 
of the first pylon of the Temple of Amun at Karnak (photo: IS). 
Three wooden ‘rockers’ from a foundation deposit of the temple of 
Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri (Archaeological Museum, Florence: 
inv. nos 2325-7; photo: IS). 
Head of the Sth-Dynasty body of Ranefer, encased in resin-soaked 
linen wrappings. This body was excavated by Petrie from Tomb 9 
at Meidum, and the head was brought back to London, but later 
destroyed when the Royal College of Surgeons was bombed in 
World War II (Petrie Museum, University College London). 


XxX 


م٣‎ 


3: 


32. 


3.3. 


م٣‎ 


4. 


4.2. 


حح 


5. 


2. 


5.3. 


5.4. 


5.5. 


5.6. 


5.7. 


5.8. 


6.1. 


86 


87 


89 


93 


94 


96 


98 


99 


100 


111 


116 


118 


120 
128 


List of Illustrations 


Petrie’s line drawing depicting his interpretation of distinctive 
cylindrical clay vessels as fritting pans’ used in the initial stage 
of glass production; Nicholson et al. (1997), however, have 
reinterpreted these ‘pans’ as glass ingot moulds (after Petrie 1894: 
fig. XII: 62). 

Fragment of a glass ingot from Amarna (Garstang Museum, 
University of Liverpool: E5654; photo: PT. Nicholson). 

Glass vessels portrayed among the materials presented by foreign 
‘tribute’ bearers to the vizier Rekhmira in his Theban tomb 
(TT100; after Davies 1943: 28). 

Two Egyptian soldiers in a chariot, New Kingdom (drawing: Ann 
Jones).] 

Ramesses III hunting wild bulls in a chariot, 1st pylon of Medinet 
Habu Temple, 20th Dynasty (photo: IS). 

Scene showing a mobile siege tower from the early Middle 
Kingdom tomb of the general Intef at Thebes (drawing: Ann 
Jones). 

Scene of craft workshops on a fragment of relief decoration from 
a 26th- Dynasty tomb at Saqqara, with chariot production at the 
right-hand side of the lower register (Florence, Museo Egizio: inv. 
no. 2606; photo: 1S). 

Chariot from an 18th-Dynasty Theban tomb (Archaeological 
Museum, Florence: inv. no. 2678; drawing: Ann Jones). 
Depiction of steam bending for the manufacture of bows, in the 
tomb of Amenemhat at Beni Hasan (after Newberry 1893: pl. 
XD). 

Map of the eastern Mediterranean and Near East in the Late 
Bronze Age (drawing: Ann Jones). 

Scene from the Battle of Qadesh, as depicted on an external wall of 
the temple of Ramesses II at Abydos, showing Egyptian chariots 
and charioteers (photo: IS). 

Scene from the battle against the Sea Peoples during the reign 

of the 20th-Dynasty ruler, Ramesses III, from the exterior 
northern wall of his mortuary temple at Medinet Habu, showing 
an Egyptian boat containing oarsmen, archers and foot soldiers 
(drawing: Ann Jones). 

Scene from an external wall of the temple of Ramesses II at 
Abydos, showing showing a group of Sherden mercenaries, with 
their distinctive helmets, shields and swords (photo: IS). 

Map showing the location of Amarna. 


xi 


6.2. 


6.3. 


6.4. 


E 


2: 


7.3. 


1.4. 


7.5. 


7.6. 


8.1. 


8.2. 


8.3. 


8.4. 


9.1. 


130 


131 


144 
145 


146 


147 


80 


101 
121 


132 


136 


140 


List of Illustrations 


Map of Amarna. 

Profile of artefact types for the whole city at Amarna, based on a 
sample of 6000 artefacts. 

Profile of house-sizes for O49 and P46, two different sectors of the 
South Suburb at Amarna. 

Profile of artefact types in the South Suburb at Amarna. 

Profile of artefact types in O49 and P46, two different sectors of 
the South Suburb at Amarna. 

Proportions of writing and painting artefacts in different parts of 
the city at Amarna. 


Tables 


Possible stages in the development of Egyptian mummification. 


. Minimum preconditions and requirements for the Egyptian 


adoption of chariotry in the early New Kingdom. 


. Technological transfer and ‘convergence’ in the Late Bronze Age. 


9: 


Flow-chart showing potential loss of objects as they pass from the 
systemic to interpretive contexts. 

Table listing the percentages of different occupations mentioned in 
Papyrus BM 10068. 

The functional arrangement of Amarna artefactual categories into 

a system. 


xii 


9:2. 
3: 


9.4. 


95: 
9.6. 


9.7. 


6.1. 


7.1 


8.1 


92: 


9.3. 


Chronology 


This chronology has been compiled on the basis of a number of different 
criteria, ranging from the interpretation of ancient texts to the radiocarbon 
dating of excavated materials. The dates for prehistory (c. 700,000-3000 BC) 
are approximations based on a combination of stratigraphic information, 
seriation of artefacts, radiocarbon dates and thermoluminescence dates. 
The dates for the majority of the pharaonic period (c. 3000-664 BC) are 
based mainly on ancient king-lists, dated inscriptions, and astronomical 
records. When the dates for two or more dynasties overlap (principally in 
the Second and Third Intermediate Periods), this is because their rule was 
accepted in different parts of the country. 


PREHISTORY 

Palaeolithic c. 700,000-10,000 BP 
Epipalaeolithic c. 10,000-7000 BP 
Neolithic c. 5300-4000 BC 
Maadi-Buto Cultural Complex (north only) <c. 4000-3200 BC 
Badarian period c. 4500-3800 BC 
Amıratian (Naqada D period c. 4000-3500 BC 
Gerzean (Naqada II) period c. 3500-3200 BC 
Naqada II/' Dynasty O’ c. 3200-3000 BC 
PHARAONIC/DYNASTIC PERIOD c. 3000-332 BC 
Early Dynastic period 3000-2686 BC 

Ist Dynasty 3000-2890 BC 
2nd Dynasty 2890-2686 BC 
Old Kingdom 2686-2181 BC 
3rd Dynasty 2686-2613 BC 
4th Dynasty 2613-2494 BC 
5th Dynasty 2494-2345 BC 
6th Dynasty 2345-2181 BC 


First Intermediate Period 2181-2055 BC 


xiii 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


2181-2125 BC 
2160-2025 BC 
2125-2055 BC 
2055-1650 BC 
2055-1985 BC 
1985-1795 BC 


1795-after 1650 BC 


1750-1650 BC 
1650-1550 BC 
1650-1550 BC 
1650-1550 BC 
1650-1550 BC 
1550-1069 BC 
1550-1295 BC 
1295-1069 BC 
1295-1186 BC 
1186-1069 BC 
1069-664 BC 
1069-945 BC 
945-715 BC 
818-715 BC 
727-715 BC 
747-656 BC 
664-332 BC 
664-525 BC 
525-404 BC 
404-399 BC 
399-380 BC 
380-343 BC 
343-332 BC 


332-30 BC 
332-305 BC 


30 BC-AD 311 


xiv 


7th and 8th Dynasties 

9th and 10th Dynasties 

11th Dynasty (Thebes only) 
Middle Kingdom 

11th Dynasty (all Egypt) 
12th Dynasty 

13th Dynasty 

14th Dynasty 

Second Intermediate Period 
15th Dynasty (Hyksos) 

16th Dynasty (minor Hyksos) 
17th Dynasty (Theban) 

New Kingdom 

18th Dynasty 

Ramessid period 

19th Dynasty 

20th Dynasty 

Third Intermediate Period 
21st Dynasty 

22nd Dynasty 

23rd Dynasty 

24th Dynasty 

25th Dynasty (Kushite period) 
Late Period 

26th Dynasty (Saite period) 
27th Dynasty (1st Persian period) 
28th Dynasty 

29th Dynasty 

30th Dynasty 

2nd Persian period 


PTOLEMAIC PERIOD 
Macedonian Dynasty 


ROMAN PERIOD 


Introduction: towards an explicitly 
anthropological analysis of technological 
change and innovation in ancient Egypt 


Technology has not generally been a revolutionary force; it has been 
responsible for keeping things the same as much as changing them 
(Edgerton 2008: 212). 


T'he archaeologists and anthropologists classify things by their uses, 
having first separated material and mental culture, or things and 
ideas (Kubler 1962: 2). 


The title of this book refers not only to technology but also to the 
process of innovation, since the intention here is not simply to discuss 
some of the means by which Egyptians created the materials and artefacts 
that they needed (many of which are particularly characteristic of their 
culture) but to consider the ways in which changes in material culture 
took place in the Nile valley, and also to consider how the development 
of particular types of artefact both reflected and instigated specific 
processes of cultural and mental change. 

However, it is also crucial to bear in mind the view, eloquently 
argued by Edgerton (2008), that technological change - whether pre- 
modern or comparatively recent — is not always a progressive sequence of 
innovations, but can also be characterised by continued use of traditional 
methods or artefacts, and even the surprisingly frequent re-introduction 
of techniques that might be assumed to have become outmoded. As 
Edgerton (2008: xiii) puts it, ‘alternatives exist for nearly all technologies: 
there are multiple military technologies, means of generating electricity, 


1 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


powering a motor car, storing and manipulating information, cutting 
metal or roofing a building. Too often histories are written as if no 
alternative could or did exist.” In other words, the traditional polarised 
view of cultures as either innovative or conservative in their technology 
ignores the fact that processes of change in material culture are frequently 
multifaceted and multi-directional. 

Thus, as we will see in the discussions of Egyptian medicine, magic, 
mummification and glass-working below (Chapters 4 and 6), certain 
aspects of pharaonic science and technology could be heavily influenced 
simultaneously by both traditional and progressive viewpoints. As 
Lemonnier (1993: 22) puts it: ‘Every technical system is continually 
evolving and is subject to a mixture of conservation and change.’ This 
applies to the overall technological system in a society, but even within 
a specific area of material culture or technology there can be very subtle 
combinations of traditional and innovative approaches. The case-study 
focusing on medicine and magic, below, makes it clear that the study of 
some forms of ancient technology can become problematic, because of 
the partial or flawed nature of the evidence itself, especially when our 
main sources are textual rather than physical or artefactual. When we 
seek to understand sequences of cultural development, including periods 
of rapid or gradual technological advance and decline, we primarily do 
so via the partial survival of the material results of human actions. It 
has frequently been pointed out that archaeology is virtually always an 
attempt to understand human prehistory and history via the study of 
those physical things that have survived rather than the totality of the 
original event or phenomenon. 

Several edited volumes over the last decade (notably Shortland 2001, 
Bourriau and Phillips 2004, Mathieu et al. 2006) have explored different 
aspects of the social context of Egyptian technology, from pottery-making 
to faience production, but the primary aim here is to explore Egyptian 
technology as an integral and embedded part of ancient Egyptian society, 
“taking material culture for what it is, a social production’ (Lemonnier 
1993: 26). Wengrow (2006: 66) has already demonstrated the importance 
of treating Egyptian technological change as a fundamental part of social 
and cultural change in his study of the Nile valley during the Neolithic 
period, in which he concludes that ‘new empirical knowledge may be 
generated or assimilated through the performance of a whole range of 


2 


1. Introduction 


social activities that we might be tempted to classify as “symbolic” or 
“ritual”. This is certainly the case with Egyptian mummification, as 
discussed in Chapter 6 below. 


The current state of Egyptian technological studies 


The study of ancient Egyptian technology is vibrant and progressive, 
with research being conducted by a wide diversity of scholars throughout 
the world. This book analyses many different types of technology, and 
the ways in which they affected and sometimes transformed Egyptian 
society and economics; in doing so, it draws not only on traditional 
archaeological and textual sources of Egyptological data but also on 
the results of scientific analyses of ancient materials and sources of 
experimental and ethno-archaeological information. 

Although ancient Egypt tends to be conventionally caricatured as one 
of the most conservative and intractable of civilisations, even the briefest 
study of the material culture of the Nile Valley shows that the Egyptians 
had an enormous capacity both to absorb new modes of production and 
innovative techniques and to exploit new materials when necessary. John 
Ray (1986: 307-8), argues that ‘Egypt's role was that of perfecter of ideas, 
rather than an inventor; most of the innovations in the ancient Near East 
come from outside Egypt, but Egypt, once it adopts a new idea, produces 
a form of it which is often more effective than it was in its original home’. 
Later in the same article Ray also suggests that, as far as the emergence 
of the hieroglyphic writing system was concerned, its failure to develop 
into an alphabetic system should not be regarded as a major flaw or as an 
indication of ‘Oriental conservatism’ but as a direct result of hieroglyphics 
being well-tailored to the expression of the ancient Egyptian language: 
‘when Egyptian is found written in an alphabetic script, as in Hellenistic 
and Roman texts where the Greek alphabet is applied to the language, 
the result, perversely enough, is extremely difficult to follow, and the 
advantages of the native script become clear’ (Ray 1986: 315). Similarly, 
the nature of the Egyptian political and social systems — both of which 
seem to have been remarkably rigid and enduring — should not blind us 
to the vitality and flexibility of much of their material culture, the rough 
chronology of which is summarised below. 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Technological time-line 


Most of our knowledge of Egyptian technology during the earliest 
periods of Egyptian prehistory (the Palaeolithic period) centres on the 
production of stone tools and weapons (Fig. 1.1), and the earliest known 
chert quarries, such as those at Nazlet Khater and Saqqara (c. 40,000 
BP). However, a much more varied range of crafts have survived from 
the Neolithic period. Apart from the domestication of plants and animals 
and the emergence of pottery (the two factors that tend to characterise 
this phase in most cultures), there are also surviving indications of 
basketry, rope-making and bone-working. 

By the Predynastic period, the Egyptians’ irrigation techniques had 
improved, thus expanding the agricultural capacity of the Nile Valley. 
By this time they were also producing large numbers of stone vessels 
and making pottery on an unparalleled scale (particularly between 
3800 and 3500 BC at Hierakonpolis). From at least the Naqada period 
onwards, they were brewing beer and cultivating grapes. They were also 


Fig. 1.1. Lower Palaeolithic 
handaxe from the desert near 
Thebes (Garstang Museum, 
University of Liverpool, E6581; 
14 x 10cm); this artefact is 
typical of the earliest phase of 
tool use in the Nile Valley, c. 
400,000-300,000. 


1. Introduction 


ج 


TT |١ 


1 


Fig. 1.2. Bird’s eye view of a ground loom, from the Middle Kingdom tomb of Khnumhotep 
III (BH3) at Beni Hasan. 


able to build wattle and daub buildings, smelt copper (by 4000 BC), 
mine gold, and work lead, gold and silver into artefacts. Some of the 
weaving techniques developed in basketry and rope-making had begun 
to be applied to textile production, using linen. The earliest depiction 
of a ground (or ‘horizontal’) loom dates from the Badarian period (c. 
4500-3800 BC); the painting, executed on a pottery vessel, shows four 
corner pegs holding two beams, one at either end, with the warp running 
between them; three bars depicted in the middle of the loom may perhaps 
be the laze rod, heddle rod and some form of beater (see Fig. 1.2 for a 
Middle Kingdom depiction of a ground loom). It was also around this 
time that the first faience was being manufactured, initially for simple 
beads and later for small animal figurines (Fig. 1.3). By the Naqada 
period, or perhaps even as early as the Badarian period, certain forms of 
artificial mummification had been introduced — the question of precisely 
when this process first began to take place depends very much on how we 
define mummification itself (see Chapter 6, which deals with questions 
of definition in relation to both mummification and the production of 
glass artefacts). Mud-brick buildings began to be constructed at least 
as early as the Naqada I, or Amratian, phase (c. 4000-3600 BC), at a 
number of sites in Upper Egypt (e.g. sites 29 and 29a at Hierakonpolis, 
see Holmes 1992; Hoffman 1980), although Kemp (2000: 79) notes that 


5 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 1.3. Protodynastic 
figurine of a baboon in 
efforescence-glazed faience, 
holding a cone on its 

knee, from Hierakonpolis 
(Petrie Museum, University 
College London, UC11002; 
h. 5.2cm). 


wattle and daub structures continued to be widely made several centuries 
after the introduction of mud brick. Evidence from such sites as Maadi 
and Tell el-Farkha indicates that mud-brick architecture had spread to 
Lower Egypt by about Naqada IId (c. 3400-3300 BC) 

However, the Predynastic development that most obviously 
foreshadowed the pharaonic period was the increasing use of images 
and symbols that are assumed to be the forerunners of hieroglyphics. 
By the 4th millennium BC, the Egyptians? use of pictorial symbols had 
evolved into the earliest stage of a sophisticated writing system (see 
Chapter 3 below). The oldest surviving sheet of papyrus — unfortunately 


6 


1. Introduction 


uninscribed — was found in a 1st-Dynasty tomb at Saqqara (c. 3000 BC). 
In the Early Dynastic period the first élite tombs incorporating stone 
masonry were built, the granite quarries at Aswan began to be exploited, 
and specialised copper tools began to be used for wood-working. Other 
Early Dynastic developments were the introduction of dyed threads and 
dyed cloth, and the earliest evidence for wine production. 

From the 3rd Dynasty (c. 2686-2613 BC) onwards, limestone quarries 
began to be exploited on a huge scale, primarily for the construction of 
pyramid complexes. From this date we also have the earliest evidence for 
the laminating of sheets of timber. By the 4th Dynasty (c. 2613-2494 
BO), a form of frit called ‘Egyptian blue’ had begun to be used both as 
a sculpting material and as a pigment, and the earliest surviving faience 
workshop (at Abydos) had come into existence. By approximately this 
date, mummification techniques, for the élite at least, began to include 
evisceration and treatment with drying agents. By the 5th Dynasty 
(c. 2494-2345 BC) the potter's wheel had been introduced (Fig. 1.4), 
although it was not until the First Intermediate Period (c. 2160-2055 
BC) that it began to be widely used. 

From the 11th Dynasty (<c. 2055-1985 BC) onwards, sandstone 
quarries began to be exploited for building and sculptural material. By 
the Middle Kingdom (c. 2055-1650 BC), excerebration (removal of 
the brain) had become part of the mummification process, which had 
by now spread to the ‘middle classes’. Techniques of gold granulation 
were also introduced at this date. The earliest surviving texts presenting 
mathematical problems and their solutions date to the Middle Kingdom 
(e.g. the Mathematical Leather Roll, BM EA 10250), but earlier 
depictions of scribes as accountants indicate that a fairly sophisticated 
system of mathematics was already in use, primarily for accounting and 
architectural purposes, from at least the beginning of the Old Kingdom 
(see Imhausen 2007). The earliest surviving medical texts also date to the 
Middle Kingdom (see Collier and Quirke 2004: 54-64). From the early 
New Kingdom we have the earliest examples of Egyptian wood turning, 
and the introduction of tapped-slag furnaces for copper processing. At 
around 1500 BC the first vertical loom is attested in Egypt. Unlike the 
horizontal loom, which was pegged out across the ground, the vertical 
(or ‘two-beamed”) loom was usually placed against a wall, with weavers 
working upwards from its base; the lower beam was either set into a 


7 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 1.4. Scene from the tomb of 
Ty at Saqqara (no. 60), showing 
a potter using a wheel to fashion 
a vessel. 


shallow hollow in the ground or resting on grooved blocks, examples 
of which have survived in some New Kingdom houses (see Fig. 1.5). By 
at least the reign of Thutmose III (c. 1479-1425 BC), glass was being 
processed (and perhaps even manufactured) by Egyptians, probably 
adopting techniques developed at an earlier date in the Near East (Fig. 
1.6). 

By the Late Period (664-332 BC), specialised techniques of gold 
refinement had been developed, and, from about 600 BC onwards, iron- 
working became fairly widespread. In a temple of the early Ptolemaic 
period (4th century BC) we have the first representation of a wooden 
object being turned on a lathe (Fig. 1.7), although the lathe had almost 
certainly already been introduced as early as the New Kingdom. It was 
around this date that artificial mummification became more widespread 
throughout all levels of the population. During the Ptolemaic period 
stake-and-strand basketry was introduced, and lime mortar began to 
be used in mud-brick buildings. By the Roman period, silver-working 
had become more common, and by the 1st century AD, cotton was in 
general use for textiles, gradually beginning to replace linen. 


8 


1. Introduction 


ZZ LLZZZZZZ 
4 


ES 


SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSNNENSSSE 


SS 
SE 


Zz‏ شی ا 
a,‏ = . 
LLL‏ 


ل 


SSS 


E 
RESIS 


= 


Fig. 1.5. Vertical looms depicted in the 
18th-Dynasty tomb of Thutnefer at Thebes 
(no. A6). 


Fig. 1.6. Blue and yellow core-formed 
glass vessel probably dating to the reign of 
Thutmose III, one of the earliest examples 
of worked glass in Egypt (Harrow School, 
HE121, h. 64cm). 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 1.7. Scene showing a carpenter turning wood on a lathe, 
in the early Ptolemaic tomb of Petosiris at Tuna el-Gebel. 


One of the crucial elements of the technological time-line above is its 
reliance on the earliest physical, visual or textual evidence for changes 
and innovations in technology. It goes almost without saying that 
these attestations must invariably be later than the actual developments 
themselves, therefore, in most areas of material culture, we can probably 
assume that changes took place earlier than the evidence currently 
suggests, and future research will invariably tend to reveal earlier instances 
or provide evidence of gradual processes of transition and development. 
Chronology, however, is only part of the picture, and much of the 
discussion in the rest of this book attempts to focus on the ‘why’ and 
the how’ rather than the when’. As Bauchspies et al. (2006: 17) put it: 
When we talk about science, truth, logic, technology and related ideas, 
we are always talking about social relations.’ 


10 


Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics: 
was Egyptian technology underpinned 
and framed by ‘science’? 


We must accept that from time to time the Egyptians produced 
figures of great intellectual ability responsible for major changes 
in traditions. Yet the Egyptians remained without the means to 
conceptualise this. Past innovators were remembered, but as ‘wise 
men’ (Kemp 2006: 159). 


Part of the basis of modern technology was already set out by Greek 
‘mechanicians’ (Gille 1980) at Alexandria in the 3rd century BC, and the 
surviving fragments of writings by these scholars suggest that something 
approximating ‘science’ had already begun to provide a theoretical 
framework and backdrop for technological developments. This raises 
the question of whether the mechanicians and their contemporaries 
— based as they were in the Egyptian Delta ¬ were building on a 
tradition of ancient Egyptian thought that could also be regarded as 
scientific in something like the modern sense of the term. Opinions 
differ considerably as to how science should be defined, particularly in an 
ancient, ‘pre-GreeK context (see, for instance, Cunningham and Wilson 
1993). Ancient Egyptian, like other ancient languages, had no word that 
refers explicitly to science, although the root rh (to know, knowledge) 
is probably the closest approximation, and of course a similar situation 
applies to many other modern cultural designations, such as ‘art and 
‘religion’ (but the two latter clearly existed in ancient Egypt, without 
actually being described directly by any specific noun). 

It is not simply that the ancient Egyptian language, and therefore 
perhaps the Egyptian mindset, did not include a word that is equivalent 


11 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


to the modern concept of scientific enquiry. There is also a crucial 
cultural difference in these ‘pre-Greek times, in that the concept of 
a single individual thinker, such as Archimedes or Pythagoras, being 
credited with crucial intellectual, scientific or technological advances 
seems not yet to have come into existence to any great extent. The idea 
of the exceptionally talented thinker as the prime agent of progress was 
not entirely absent from Egyptian culture — such individuals as Imhotep 
and Amenhotep son of Hapu were remembered as great men, whose 
achievements resulted in the very unusual situation of their being deified 
(see Wildung 1977). However, as Kemp (2006: 158) observes, no matter 
how much these comparatively rare individuals might be admired, 
they could not be acknowledged as innovators by their contemporaries 
because ‘the ancient myth that whatever was new and admirable was 
in fact true to the past allowed no room for recognition of individual 
genius’. Lemonnier (1993: 19-20) has come to the same conclusion 
in a more cross-cultural context: ‘mythology legitimates the origin of 
particular technical operations, and a tool may be worshipped in lieu 
of a goddess. In short, technical variants are diversely embedded in the 
larger symbolic framework that underlies the hierarchy of ... society’. 
In other words, the pre-science era prioritised, and even mythologised, 
the development of craft or technology itself rather than the craftsmen 
or thinkers who shaped it. This automatically increases the difficulty 
involved in examining the scientific framework within which Egyptian 
technology developed. 

There seems to be little or no evidence that the Egyptians 
investigated the natural world with techniques that approximate to 
experimentation or analytical research, and indeed a number of ancient 
textual sources suggest that they expected to find knowledge recorded 
almost magically in written documents — thus, for instance, there are 
a number of texts that refer to written knowledge transcribed by a 
god (usually Thoth) and hidden in a box. This so-called Book of 
Thoth (which was usually thought to contain everything that was 
known about the physical world, the divine system of laws, magic, 
and the nature of the afterlife) features heavily in such Ptolemaic 
narrative cycles as the tales of Setna Khaemwaset and Neferkaptah 
(see Lichtheim 1980: 125-51). 

Geoffrey Lloyd (2004: 13) points out, however, that, ‘even when the 


12 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


most up-to-date science does not need to refer directly to earlier ideas, 
they belong nevertheless to the same field of enquiry in so far as they 
tackled the problems of understanding presented by the same general 
phenomena’. In other words, the entire history of science is marked 
by the continual replacement of incorrect or inappropriate methods and 
data with new techniques or paradigms. On this basis even the so-called 
pseudo-science of the pre-Greek civilisations (and indeed the work of 
the early Greeks) can be regarded as ‘true’ science by broadly defining 
scientific enquiry as the pursuit of knowledge and understanding, 
regardless of the precise methodology employed. 

The best-documented aspects of Egyptian investigation and speculation 
are in the areas that would now be described as mathematics, medicine 
and astronomy, which were perhaps already recognised in some sense as 
separate independent disciplines. However, in the case of medicine and 
astronomy there is distinct overlap with the areas of culture that would 
now be described as magic and religion respectively. There are therefore 
crucial differences in the relationships between these early ‘scientific’ 
areas and the Egyptian cultural and social contexts. 

There is one problem that all scholars of ancient science encounter 
when they seek to understand pre-modern and/or non-western science: 
whether to attempt to understand it in our own terms or in terms that 
would have been recognised and understood by the ancient ‘scientists? 
themselves, or their contemporaries (see, for instance, Lloyd 2004: 
8-11). Both approaches can lead to misconceptions and confusion — 
thus, the use of modern terminology can perhaps erroneously imply 
that not only the terms but also the associated meanings and systems 
of thought already existed. Conversely, if we attempt to describe 
Egyptian mathematics or medicine purely through the media of the 
ancient vocabulary we encounter difficulties in adequately translating, 
defining or contextualising the ancient terms and ideas. It is not even 
simply a question of translating more or less accurately and precisely, 
since the actual system of thought underlying certain vocabularies 
may differ from that to which we are accustomed, as Lyons (1995) 
has demonstrated, for example, in the field of colour terminology, in 
that many cultures use ‘colour’ terms that refer to luminosity rather 
than hue. 


13 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


The relationship between science and technology 


On the basis of the above discussion of ancient Egyptian areas of 
specialised knowledge, it can be argued that something roughly 
corresponding to the modern concept of science did exist, but that it was 
not overtly recognised as such. To what extent, then, might this early 
science have sustained and activated the technology of ancient Egypt? 
A closely related question of course is the extent to which science was 
a prerequisite for ancient technology. How much of ancient Egyptian 
technological innovation emerged out of sustained periods of scientific 
investigation, and how much of it simply arose in the form of ad hoc 
solutions to practical problems? A potential answer to this (although one 
which, to some extent, sidesteps the main issue), is to apply to Egypt the 
arguments deployed by Cuomo (2007) in her monograph on the material 
culture and technology of ancient Greece and Rome, in which she 
discusses at length the diverse meanings and implications of the Greek 
term fechnê (‘craft or ‘art’) and its Latin equivalent ars; as she points 
out, ‘both carpentry and medicine were technai; a rhetorician, capable of 
turning opinions around in the minds of his audience, and a sculptor, 
capable of turning a block of marble into the statue of a god, both 
qualified as technicians’. This holistic interpretation of technê, whether it 
is translated as ‘craft’, ‘art or ‘skill, suggests that the modern distinctions 
between science and technology barely existed in the ancient world. Can 
the same be said then of the ancient Egyptian term pmuwt, which is often 
translated as ‘craftwork’ but which actually probably encompasses some of 
the senses of ‘art and ‘skill too (see, for instance, Drenkhahn 1976)? 

To what extent did Egyptians even consciously divide such aspects of 
technology as architecture, structural engineering and the decorative arts 
into separate entities? Kemp (2006: 158) suggests an ancient Egyptian 
lack of awareness or interest in abstract divisions of knowledge’. This is 
perhaps reflected not only in the tendency towards anonymity of master- 
craftsmen but also in the creation of lexicographical lists that seem to 
represent more of a continuum of knowledge rather than a rigid division 
into distinct categories. The classic word-lists or onomastica (Gardiner 
1947, Nims 1950, Osing 1981), were composed from at least the Middle 
Kingdom onwards (the fragmentary Ramesseum Onomasticon, now in 


14 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


Berlin, being the earliest). The introduction to the classic example of 
this genre, the Onomasticon of Amenemope (the main physical copy of 
which is the Golenischeff Papyrus, at the Puskhin Museum in Moscow), 
states that it is the beginning of the teaching for clearing the mind, 
for instruction of the ignorant and for learning all things that exist ... 
(Gardiner 1947: 1). Gardiner claims that it is not merely a list but an 
attempt to classify phenomena, given that the order runs from such 
major entities as sky, water and earth, at one extreme, to choice cuts 
of meat at the other. Within each section there is also a tendency to 
list from highest/largest down to lowest/smallest, but this hierarchical 
listing is not particularly informative. In reality these onomastica seem 
thrown together rather than representing a serious attempt to arrange 
knowledge coherently and logically together. It is notable that no 
attempt is made by the text's original author or any of the subsequent 
scribal copyists to add any explanation or commentary concerning the 
individual terms, restricting the value of the onomasticon generally to 
that of a vocabulary list or aide-mémoire for scribes. As Kemp (2006: 
71) puts it: ‘Ancient knowledge, when not of a practical nature (of the 
kind: how to build a pyramid and how to behave at table), was essentially 
the accumulation of names of things, beings and places, together with 
their associations. “Research” lay in extending the range of associations 
in areas which we would now term “theology”. 

This situation must partly derive from the fact that many of the 
surviving texts on ostraca and papyri relate to scribal education, which 
was evidently concerned not only with teaching the writing and reading 
of the hieratic script but also with the immersion of the scribally trained 
officials in the official ideology of the royal court; as Assmann (2002: 
124) puts it, Cultural knowledge, in its central sense as binding norms of 
behaviour, was encoded in written form. Learning to write meant more 
than learning to plan, organise and administer; it meant — in a very broad 
sense — learning to live.’ 

Papyrus Anastasi I (BM EA1024; Fischer-Elfert 1986), the so-called 
Satirical Letter, allegedly written by a scribe named Hori, suggests that 
New Kingdom scribes were also expected to have the ability to accomplish 
a number of complex technological tasks, including the transportation of 
an obelisk, the excavation of an artificial lake, the construction of a ramp 
and the erection of a colossal statue. This, in theory at least, elevates the 


15 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Egyptian scribe - who may, after all, be the closest equivalent in ancient 
Egypt to a scholar or scientist — from a mere bureaucrat to a renaissance 
man sitting at the interface of ancient ‘science’ and technology. 


Egyptian mathematics and scribal education 


The surviving examples of ancient Egyptian mathematical texts seem 
to have been virtually all created as part of the education of apprentice 
scribes. As Imhausen (2007: 8) puts it: These papyri contain collections 
of problems and their solutions to prepare the scribes for situations 
they were likely to face in their later work ... While mathematical 
papyri are extant from two separate periods only, depictions of scribes 
as accountants (and therefore using mathematics) are evident from all 
periods, beginning with the Old Kingdom. 

The scribes needed to master not only writing itself but also the basics 
of accountancy and administration, which would be crucial to them in 
various aspects of their later careers as bureaucrats, administrators and 
technical overseers (see Imhausen and Ritter 2004: 72) - grain, land and 
labour were three aspects of the Egyptian economy during the pharaonic 
period that frequently had to be quantified by scribes. It is important 
here to note that mathematics and arithmetic seem not to have been 
regarded as arcane separate areas only for specialists but as part of the 
overall scribal ‘skilling process. There is therefore a definite parallel 
with Cuomo’s discussion of technê, when she talks about the essential 
‘teachability’ of technê in classical Athens: “The rationale is that, although 
when it comes to actions experience is not different from techne, and techne 
is acquired through experience, unlike experience techne has knowledge 
of the universal and can be taught’ (Cuomo 2007: 13). Plato’s Timaeus 
conceives of the universe as having been created by technê, through the 
action of the divine craftsman or Demiurge, for which Egyptian myth 
has a fairly close parallel in the so-called Memphite Theology, preserved 
on the Shabaqo Stone (c. 705 BC, British Museum EA 498), a basalt 
slab bearing a hieroglyphic inscription in which Ptah, the patron deity of 
craftsmen, creates all things by pronouncing their names (see Allen 1988). 

Egyptian mathematics was evidently taught by means of numerous 
examples rather than by the use of abstract formulae, so that problems 
were usually broken down into a repetitive series of smaller calculations. 


16 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


What kinds of texts have survived? In physical terms, the texts take the 
form of hieratic papyri, ostraca and one leather document (the Egyptian 
Mathematical Leather Roll, see Glanville 1927) from the pharaonic 
period, and a number of demotic papyri from the Ptolemaic period (332- 
30 BC; see Parker 1972). Most of the more famous individual examples, 
such as the Rhind and Moscow mathematical papyri (see Robins and 
Shute 1987 and Struve 1930, respectively, and see Fig. 2.1 here for one 


ا 
a‏ 


E 
7/8 ک ١١اا )ا‎ 


cell t e< 


> €8 ° 


1 6 ~0 


I1 [aa حت‎ > 
11l حى ااا‎ 8 
1111 چ ےہ حه ج‎ 
Aa. 
ا11‎ lı xs — 
© <© ج ے‎ 8 
Wtf Te 
K> 8 ّح ا1 اأ‎ : 
SAN a 
| A Ill dd Ke سے‎ 0 
oT N 784 
iit CG ™A TE a 
Fig. 2.1. Problem no. 10 in the 1 e ا‎ 1| 11 
Moscow mathematical papyrus, 


showing the method for calculating د‎ Iااا‎ û TT أ‎ 
ı1 


the area of a semi-circle. 


9 
r ê 4 


90) 1 ¬ EA NT 13 
E 4 


17 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


of the Moscow problems), were obtained via the art market rather than 
by excavation, and in fact the set of seven fragments of papyri from the 
Middle Kingdom settlement of Lahun (Imhausen and Ritter 2004) are 
the only properly provenanced examples, as they derive from Flinders 
Petrie’s excavations at the site. Shute (2001: 348) remarks that ‘the 
scantiness of the surviving material ... undoubtedly fails to cover the full 
extent of their knowledge’. 

There are two different kinds of Egyptian mathematical texts: 
‘procedure/problem’ types and ‘table’ types. The procedure texts 
begin by setting out a specific mathematical problem and then 
go on to solve it in a series of stages essentially corresponding 
to the modern concept of an algorithm. In contrast, table texts 
constitute two-dimensional arrays of numbers that can be assumed 
to have been used either as aids to the procedure texts or as part 
of one or more specific real acts of calculation. These tables could 
in theory have been used repeatedly to look up the answers to 
individual mathematical problems. In other words, in the absence 
of formulae, Egyptian scribes learned their mathematics by copying 
out set examples, replacing the figures with their own. Unlike the 
Mesopotamian mathematicians perhaps, the Egyptians seem to have 
been more interested in practicalities than in theory. Nevertheless, 
certain calculations in the Rhind Papyrus end with the short phrase 
mitt pw (it is equal’), which is used where calculations could not be 
exactly matched to proofs. 

The Egyptian numerical system was a combination of the decimal and 
the repetitive. It lacked a symbol for zero, but scribes occasionally left 
a gap between numbers as though such a sign existed. Numbers were 
written from the largest to the smallest. The Egyptians’ calculation of 
whole numbers was relatively simple: to multiply by ten, for example, 
the appropriate hieroglyphs were changed for the next highest, so that 
ten, for instance, could become one hundred. In other calculations, a 
sum equal to the desired multiplier was reached by a process of doubling, 
while the multiplicand was itself doubled as many times as necessary for 
the multiplier. 

Thus the sum 13 x 19 would be calculated by first deriving the 
multiplier from the table below, in which 8 + 4 + 1 = 13: 


18 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


multiplier multiplicand 
1 X 19 19 3 
2 Xx 19 38 
4 X 19 76 3 
8 X 19 152 3 
Total 13 Xx 19 247 


Once a number was reached which was equal to half or more of that 
desired (i.e. 8, in this case, is more than half of 13), no further doubling 
was needed. The scribe would then tick the relevant lines in the table 
and add them up, 152 + 76 + 19 = 247, which is the equivalent of 13 
x 19. Multiplication tables were therefore replaced by simple tables of 
duplication, and division was achieved by the reciprocal method, i.e. the 
repeated halving of the multiplier. 

T'he use of fractions appears to have caused more difficulties, particularly 
as the Egyptians recognised only those in which the numerator was one, 
all of which were written by placing the hieroglyph r above the relevant 
number. There were, however, also some special signs for such commonly 
used fractions as two-thirds, three-quarters, four-fifths and five-sixths, 
and the Rhind Papyrus is exceptional in presenting a table of fractions 
in which the numerator is two. Complicated fractions were written by 
reducing them to two or three separate fractions, the first of which had 
the smallest possible denominator. Thus two-fifths was written as one- 
third + one-fifteenth. In calculations fractions were broken down and 
thus treated as whole numbers. 


Mathematics, pyramid building and the calculation of skd 


Modern surveys of pharaonic and Greco-Roman monuments have 
enabled much to be deduced concerning the Egyptians’ practical use of 
mathematics, and — at least since the time of Petrie’s survey of Giza in 
1880-82 — it has been clear that the principles and methods involved 
in setting out the pyramid complexes (constructed during the period 
c. 2700-1650 BC) were pragmatic rather than mystical (Petrie 1883). 
From a relatively early date, the Egyptians developed geometrical 
knowledge on the basis of observation of practical situations. The 
surviving texts indicate, for instance, that they knew that they could 
calculate the area of a rectangle by multiplying its length by its width 


19 


20 


`(odo]s) ps 9J3 pure 38u2][-aseq 243 uog p21e[n2[e2 
sr prueaAd e Jo {3ro aqa :snzAdeq [eeu PUIJY 23U32 UY £ç ‘ou U2[qO3{ ‘TT SIH 


du u tm 9s dm ud ; wh‏ اد س 
ا بشتو اء 
n =ld u ¥o ds dmmû:z — 3443 ju @& u iro wu bs ¢ ET 0‏ ی 
ا egale Nelo wa we N"‏ 
ا 7 u 0 4 ¥ bu. 2 uy wi dm me—yd wuioF & u lo‏ 
Jm Posy wmwu eW‏ 6 جو LE‏ 
uhg# Tue wû f sip sd # duro gz je iun me24 £‏ 
BY"‏ ا ج إ[ کے سه Û SE r de: Gg.‏ 
u ıo umf -79°} gsds I wu spf df du-u-mg uf uk‏ 
Vo FeV 0E PUGS IFOY Kela VII‏ 17 
SUS SIU IE‏ وا چ 
~E PICT rE E‏ 
EAE TS SITE LILI N <7‏ 
اا ‘TIT ISN zf °4 r‏ 
1T FOF SHE RHTIUESÎ DIN!‏ 


£ 
2 
1 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


(which is one of the mathematical problems presented in the Moscow 
Mathematical Papyrus, see Struve 1930: 37-8). Similarly, they knew that 
if a triangle was drawn inside the rectangle, having the same length as its 
sides and the same height as its width, then its area would be half that 
of the rectangle. Arguably, however, their most significant achievement 
in geometry was the recognition that the diameter of a circle could be 
used to calculate its area (problem no. 50 in the Rhind Mathematical 
Papyrus, see Robins and Shute 1987: 44-6; Gillings 1972: 139-43). They 
did so by squaring eight-ninths of the diameter’s length, thus providing 
an approximate notional value for x of 3.16 (although opinions differ as 
to whether Egyptian scribes were aware of the concept of 7 itself — see, 
for instance, Robins and Shute 1987, who assume that the Egyptians did 
know 7, and Rossi 2004: 65-7, who argues not only that the Egyptians 
did not conceive of x but that even Archimedes ‘did not think in terms 
of x7 as we do today’ since much of even Greek mathematics, up to 
the 2nd century BC, was ‘non-arithmetised’”). The Egyptians were also 
able to reckon volumes of many three-dimensional shapes (including 
the cylinder and pyramid, even when truncated) by using a series of 
smaller calculations, which, although they lack the elegance of formulae, 
nevertheless produce correct solutions (e.g. problem no. 10 in the 
Moscow Mathematical Papyrus, calculating the curved surface of a 
hemisphere, according to Gillings 1972: 194-201, or a semi-cylinder, 
according to Miatello 2010). 


Mathematics and ancient Egyptian construction engineering 


The above discussion centres on the papyri and ostraca that allow us 
to study Egyptian mathematical exercises, but another approach, taken 
by Corinna Rossi (2004), is to compare such texts with Egyptian 
construction engineering, asking the fundamental question: what 
impact did mathematics have on Egyptian architecture. Rossi’s study 
of the mathematical basis of the pyramids does its best to restrict the 
mathematics to that which can be proven to have been known in ancient 
Egypt: the calculation of the volume and the skd (slope) of pyramids), 
especially on the basis of the Rhind and Moscow mathematical papyri 
(see Fig. 2.2). The skd is specifically discussed in problems 56-60 of the 
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (Chace et al. 1929: pl. 79), and Gillings 


21 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


(1972: 212) defines it as ‘the inclination of any one of the four triangular 
faces to the horizontal plane of its base ... measured as so many horizontal 
units per one vertical unit rise’. Physical proof of the process of planning 
a specific angle of slope was discovered by Petrie (1892: 11-13, pl. 8) 
on the corners of Mastaba 17 at Meidum. He found four L-shaped 
mud-brick walls constructed below ground level at the corners of the 
monument, each serving as a means of checking the mastaba’s slope: 
the mud-brick walls effectively allowed the architects to first create a 
zero-line (given the unevenness of the ground on which the mastaba 
was built), and then draw lines on the walls that showed projections of 
the correct slope. Rossi (2004: 191-2) points out how this basic set of 
diagrams ultimately allowed the architects to enlarge the mastaba while 
maintaining the same slope: “At some point, two other lines were drawn 
parallel to the first pair, and the mastaba was enlarged by the short 
distance between them. In this way, regardless of the depth of the rock 
bed, the masons could start the construction of a sloping side which 
would reach the surface at the “right” point. 

Rossi restricts her overall hypothesis concerning pyramid construction 
to a limited set of aims, allowing her to present a set of basic constructional 
factors that apply as well to the Great Pyramid as to the small mud-brick 
pyramidia on New Kingdom private tomb-chapels. Her basic thesis is 
that the variations in pyramidal form can essentially be related to the 
choices made by architects between different triangular forms. The value 
of this approach in terms of the study of the Bent Pyramid of Sneferu 
at Meidum is that it allows the three basic stages of this engineering 
project to be viewed objectively as mathematical solutions with common 
parameters rather than simply as a series of unrelated attempts to 
achieve a ‘true pyramid’. Indeed the concept of the ‘true pyramid’ as the 
ultimate aim of Egyptian architects is rendered redundant by adopting 
the viewpoint that the choice of base-length and slope were essentially 
mathematical decisions, revolving around about eight ‘triplets’ (such as 
the Pythagorean 3-4-5 triplet). 

Rossi is not arguing that mathematics dictates the forms of the 
pyramids, but that the evolution of pyramidal shape and slope can actually 
be boiled down to a series of simple mathematical choices. This makes it a 
little more likely that at least one practical aspect of Egyptian technology 
- architecture and structural engineering — was fundamentally rooted in 


22 


2. Analysing Egyptian technological dynamics 


their scientific knowledge and techniques (primarily mathematics). The 
distinction between science and technology is sometimes characterised as 
being analogous to the differences between basic and applied knowledge 
respectively, but it is surely the case that all knowledge is ‘applied to 
some degree or other — the crucial thing perhaps is the extent to which 
developments in knowledge are able to have significant impacts on wide 
areas of society or economics. 


23 


Writing: hurman communication as 


social technology 


More than any other single invention, writing has transformed 
human consciousness (Walter J. Ong 2002: 77). 


The Americans have need of the telephone, but we do not. We 
have plenty of messenger boys (Sir William Preece, chief engineer, 
British Post Office, 1878, quoted in Wilkinson 2008: 112). 


Introduction 


The appearance of Homo sapiens is currently dated to around 100,000 
BB, and the earliest forms of writing appear to have been developed 
by the Sumerians at around 3500 BC, so the ‘oral phase of human 
development was at least twenty times longer than the iterate’ phase. 
The first writing systems developed by the people of Mesopotamia, 
Egypt, the Indus valley, Crete and China were more than just the 
making of meaningful marks, as rock art or cave paintings had been, 
but the emergence of sufficiently complex codes to allow the spoken 
word to be physically preserved, recorded and communicated. Walter 
Ong (2002: 83) suggests that, The critical and unique breakthrough 
into new worlds of knowledge was achieved within human consciousness 
not when simple semiotic marking was devised but when a coded system 
of visible marks was invented whereby a writer could determine the exact 
words that the reader would generate from the text.’ 

Writing systems are forms of technology that have been so firmly 
embedded in most human cultures for so many millennia that we can 
take them for granted to some extent, and fail to give them their full status 
as extremely sophisticated early technological developments in their own 


24 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


right, quite apart from their enormous implications for the development 
and dissemination of other technologies. As Jack Goody (1968: 1) points 
out in one of his earlier discussions of literacy and its consequences: 
‘even where writers are specifically investigating the differences between 
“simple” and “advanced” societies, peoples, mentalities, etc., they have 
neglected to examine the implications of the very feature which is so 
often used to define the range of societies with which they claim to be 
dealing, namely, the presence or absence of writing’. 

A considerable body of scholarship, particularly in applied linguistics, 
sociolinguistics and literary studies, has been devoted to the identification 
and analysis of differences between mental and social structures and 
behaviour, both before and after the introduction of some form of 
written script. A real pioneer in this area was Eric Havelock (1963), who 
discussed the ancient Greek transition from orality to literacy, arguing 
that this only fully took place with the work of Plato (see also Goody 
1977, 1986, 1987, on ‘technology of the intellect in a variety of ancient 
and modern cultures, as well as Foley 1980 and Chafe 1982). Such crucial 
areas of culture as religion, law, administration and economics were hugely 
transformed and shaped by the ability to use writing, even if, as seems 
likely in the case of Egypt, the literate élite constituted a tiny minority of 
the population (see Baines and Eyre 1983). According to Goody (1987: 
298), writing is a mechanism that permits us to change the format of 
our creative endeavours, the shape of our knowledge, our understanding 
of the world, and our activities within it’. A good ancient example of the 
latter was the gradual creation of canonical texts documenting religious 
rituals (such as the Edfu temple inscriptions in which the daily temple 
rituals are laboriously recorded, see Fairman 1954), which presumably 
contributed significantly to the degree of standardisation of state religion 
throughout Egypt, allowing the same rituals to be performed in different 
temples throughout the country. 

In all kinds of respects, the development of writing in ancient cultures 
transformed the ways in which individuals observed and understood 
the particular space and time in which they were situated — place and 
date automatically acquire greater significance and meaning with the 
development and proliferation of written documents. One example of 
this phenomenon, which is discussed at some length by Ong, is the way 
in which purely orally based cultures appear to have a lack of interest 


25 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


in the measurement of time and the precise dating of people or events: 
‘Persons whose world view has been formed by high literacy need to 
remind themselves that in functionally oral cultures the past is not felt 
as an itemized terrain, peppered with verifiable and disputed “facts” 
or bits of information. It is the domain of the ancestors, a resonant 
source for renewing awareness of present existence, which itself is not 
an itemized terrain either. Orality knows no lists or charts or figures’ 
(Ong 2002: 97). In the context of ‘listing’ as a precondition or essential 
component of writing, it is interesting to note that some of the decorated 
late Predynastic stone palettes seem to prefigure the register composition 
of early Egyptian art (Davis 1976), signalling a transition from the less 
coherent organisation of earlier prehistoric art to the codified forms of 
decorum in the art and writing of the pharaonic period. 

Baines (1983: 593) also stresses the impact of the invention of writing 
systems on the process of memorising and communicating data: “The 
initial impact of writing is a huge increase in and elaboration of memory. 
The literate can extend their communication in space and time, and their 
memory in compass and duration.” He goes on to argue, however, that 
literacy is more of a response to rapid cultural change than a stimulus to 
it. Whereas others have stressed the roles that ancient scripts must have 
played in the development of early states and economies, Baines suggests 
that the capacity for writing to serve as stimulus for major change is 
severely limited in ancient cultures, and that it is only in comparatively 
modern times that the cultural and social effects of the use of the 
written word have been fully exploited and experienced. Nevertheless, 
this is simply to state that writing, like many other inventions, was not 
necessarily instantly influential on its cultural contexts — the full impact 
of writing was perhaps always more apparent in mature literate cultures 
rather than in those that were still developing at the time that they 
passed from orality to literacy. 

In many of the cultures in which the earliest writing systems developed, 
the emergence of the full-blown grammatically organised script seems to 
have been preceded by a phase during which the basic elements of the 
system were beginning to appear as symbols (and primarily, initially, as 
logograms or ideograms of various types). This pre-writing (or perhaps 
even quasi-writing) phase is particularly well-attested in Neolithic 
Mesopotamia, where three-dimensional clay tokens seem to have initially 


26 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


been used in early economic transactions (see Amiet 1966, Schmandt- 
Besserat 1978; 1992). The possible link between this early accounting 
system and the early cuneiform script takes the form of small clay 
containers (or bullae), originally attached to bales of merchandise, within 
which sets of clay tokens were sometimes placed; the outer surfaces of 
the bullae bore impressed signs, some of which corresponded to the 
tokens and could also be to some extent equated with early Sumerian 
cuneiform signs (Schmandt-Besserat 1996: 55-85). Schmandt-Besserat’s 
theory has been criticised by some scholars on several grounds, such as 
the fact that it cannot be clearly proven that anything other than the 
numbering system actually links the tokens with the earliest writing (i.e. 
few symbols actually seem to occur in both systems), and the fact that 
some of the earliest texts actually pre-date some of the tokens. Yoffee 
(1995: 286) points out that “While Schmandt-Besserat has certainly 
demonstrated that the system (or probably several systems) of tokens 
conveyed meaning in Mesopotamian prehistory, she has not appreciated 
the difference between these (highly specific) aides memoires and 
writing as a communication of speech acts. ... Although the first writing 
in Mesopotamia shows the important, but not exclusively economic, 
context in which it was devised (i.e. for keeping track of commodities), 
a cursory look at the cross-cultural evidence provides little justification 
for a single, simple, and linear progression from various complex 
iconographic systems to writing.’ It can certainly be argued, however, 
that the initial impetus to create visual symbolic systems seems often to 
derive from the logistics of economic transactions. Even if Schmandt- 
Besserat’'s theory were entirely correct for the origins of writing in 
Mesopotamia, there is little surviving evidence for any similar process 
having occurred in ancient Egypt (i.e. no equivalent tokens or bullae 
have survived from the Predynastic period), although recent evidence 
from late Predynastic funerary material at Abydos suggests that the early 
use of Egyptian writing was primarily connected with the counting and 
labelling of objects (see Postgate et al. 1995). 


Abydos and the origins of the Egyptian writing system 


For many years it was assumed that the Sumerian cuneiform writing 
system, the proto-cuneiform version of which emerged in southern Iraq 


27 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


at least as early as 3400 BC (Nissen 1986), preceded Egyptian hieroglyphs, 
and that the relatively sudden appearance of writing in Egypt, at the 
end of the fourth millennium BC, was therefore probably the result of 
increased contact with Near Eastern peoples. Although it seemed unlikely 
that the Egyptian writing system had evolved directly out of cuneiform, 
many scholars believed that the basic idea of pictographic writing might 
have come from Mesopotamia by so-called ‘stimulus diffusion’ (see, for 
example, Ray 1986, Bard 1992 and Schmandt-Besserat 1981: 323-4). 
However, archaeological discoveries at Abydos have provided insights 
into the early emergence of the Egyptian writing system, suggesting 
not only that the origins of the script almost certainly lie much 
further back than was previously thought, but also that the purpose 
they initially served was economic rather than ritualistic. In 1988, the 
German Archaeological Institute excavated tomb U-j at Abydos, the 
impressive burial of an early élite individual (probably a local ruler 
who held the name Scorpion) dating to the early Naqada III period (<c. 
3200 BC; see Boehmer et al. 1993 and Dreyer 1993), which was by 
far the largest tomb in the late Predynastic Cemetery U. As with the 
majority of the earliest inhumations at Abydos, the wood, matting and 
mud-brick superstructure of the burial had largely deteriorated, but its 
substructure comprised a large (9.1 x 7.3m) rectangular mud-brick- 
lined pit containing twelve individual chambers separated by mud-brick 
walls. The surviving material in one of these rooms included about 150 
small labels carved from wood, bone and ivory, which appear to bear 
clearly recognisable hieroglyphs consisting of numbers, commodities and 
possibly also place-names or royal agricultural estates (see Fig. 3.1). The 
importance of these hieroglyphic labels is that they are almost certainly 
not just pictorial signs (ideograms/logograms’”), which would represent 
a much more basic stage in the history of the script; many of them 
are representations of sounds in the spoken language (‘phonograms”), 
a stage in the development of the script that was not thought to have 
occurred until at least the 1st Dynasty (see, for instance, Kaplony 1963, 
for this earlier view). The labels have been identified as phonetic symbols 
because some of them appear to spell out the names of well-known towns 
frequently mentioned in later inscriptions, such as Buto and Bubastis 
(Dreyer 1998). It therefore seems that the bureaucrats employed by the 
earliest rulers at Abydos — at least 200 years before the 1st Dynasty 


28 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


Fig. 3.1. Inscribed labels from tomb U-j at Abydos, c. 3200 BC (Egyptian Museum, Cairo, 
each measuring 1-2cm. 

— were already using a sophisticated form of Egyptian script involving 
phonetic signs as well as ideograms (Kahl 2002-4, Morenz 2004). 


Early potmarks — is an aide-mémoire a writing system? 


Another category of evidence that has been regarded as potentially 
relevant to the ‘prehistory’ of the Egyptian writing system is the 
corpus of Predynastic and Early Dynastic potmarks that have survived 
on sherds excavated at many early sites in both Upper and Lower 
Egypt (see Helck 1990, van den Brink 1992 and Bréand 2005). The 
earliest of the potmarks appear at some sites in the Naqada I period 
(c. 4000-3600; see, for instance, Bréand 2005: 17 for a discussion of 
early examples from Adaîma) and the latest date to the end of the 1st 
Dynasty. Although there is not yet any general consensus as to the 
purpose and meaning of these early potmarks, some scholars have argued 
that they may have functioned as aides-mémoire applied by Predynastic 
and Early Dynastic potters in order to control the production of certain 
vessels. As Bréand (2009: 61) proposes, ‘Within the framework of the 
contemporary emergence of hieroglyphic writing ~ which is concomitant 
with the formation of a central court that uses an official system of 
counting, which the tags containing numerals in Tomb U-j attest — this 
example of a non-official system of counting has evolved as an alternative 


29 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Selected Gebel el-Asr non-numerical marks 


Fig. 3.2. A selection of five 
potmarks on Middle Kingdom 
Marl-C storage jars from Quartz 


Ridge, Gebel el-Asr.‏ کر 


Jar 14 Jar 20 


Jars Jar 12 Jar 13 


system of communication which cannot be deciphered outside of its 
context of use, and therefore cannot be considered as a transcription of 
hieroglyphic signs. In other words, the system of symbols incised on 
late Predynastic pots before firing cannot be regarded as an early stage in 
the development of the hieroglyphic writing system because it appears to 
be a largely separate and distinct method of communication. More than 
7000 late Predynastic and Early Dynastic potmarks are currently known; 
although they include some signs that are very similar to contemporary 
hieroglyphs, most appear to be non-linguistic signs and they never seem 
to be used to represent spoken language. Potmarks, which continue in 
use throughout the pharaonic and Greco-Roman periods, always appear 
to be a parallel system of symbols existing alongside hieroglyphics, with 
only very small areas of overlap (see, for instance, Aston 2009, Gallorini 
2009, Shaw 2009; see Fig. 3.2). 


Writing as a technological choice in Egypt and elsewhere 


It may often seem that writing was a single inevitable visual communication 
strategy for many early cultures, yet the khipu system of communication 
developed by the Inca (comprising knotted cords containing numeric 
and other values encoded in a base ten positional system), for instance, 
suggests that there have certainly been other possible trajectories, and 
that the emergence of written sign-based forms of communication was a 
technological choice rather than a given. It is also clear that other forms 
of visual communication have thrived in certain circumstances alongside 


30 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


the canonical writing systems, sometimes using different media, as we 
have already seen with the late Predynastic and Early Dynastic potmarking 
system above (see Haring and Kaper 2009 and Andrassy et al. 2009 for 
discussions of other Egyptian ‘non-textual marking systems’, such as 
quarry marks and textile marks during the pharaonic period); this re- 
emphasises the fact that forms of communication emerge and adapt in 
response to cultural and technical needs, and that different methods of 
communication are generally deliberately chosen, while others may have 
been rejected. Since new technologies are usually created or adopted in 
order to solve particular problems or to enhance existing equipment and 
expertise, we must ask: for what purpose was the Egyptian hieroglyphic 
script initially used? 

While there has been general agreement for some time that the 
Mesopotamian cuneiform system was developed primarily as an accounting 
and administrative tool (and this is simply reinforced by Schmandt- 
Besserat’s demonstration of the possible links between early tokens and 
the emerging cuneiform signs, even if this only constitutes functional 
rather than evolutionary overlap), there has been less consensus on the 
initial roles played by other writing systems, such as those used by the 
Egyptians and the early Chinese. Postgate et al. (1995), however, present 
a persuasive argument, bearing in mind all the possible problems posed 
by the varying survivability of different writing materials, that at least 
four of the major early scripts (from Mesopotamia, China, Egypt and 
Mesoamerica) have primarily utilitarian origins, although they admit 
that, in addition ‘some components of the different scripts may have 
originated in ceremonial symbols, or that written texts may have served 
to display the agenda of a political élite’ (Postgate et al. 1995: 479). 


‘Craft literacy’: the mobility and exploitation of 
scribes as technicians 


As noted above, in the introduction to this chapter, a great deal has been 
written about the social restrictions surrounding the writing systems of 
ancient Egypt, primarily in terms of the likely limited audience for early 
texts, given the potentially small percentage of the population that could 
read or write, even at the height of pharaonic culture (Baines 1983, 
Baines and Eyre 1983). There is however a more directly technological 


31 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


sense in which the hieroglyphic, hieratic and demotic writing systems 
may have been culturally and socially circumscribed. Havelock (1963) 
noted that, in many cultures, the introduction of writing quickly leads 
to the development of ‘craft literacy’, whereby a professional scribe can 
be hired by others to write a particular document, just as a carpenter 
might be hired to make a chair or coffin. A much more recent example 
of this form of craft-literacy is provided by the West African kingdom 
of Mali, where karamokos (effectively professional writers/teachers) plied 
their trade from medieval times until the 20th century (Goody 1968: 
169-71). As Ong (2002: 93) points out, ‘At such a craft-literacy stage, 
there is no need for an individual to know reading and writing any more 
than any other trade. Only around Plato’s time in ancient Greece, more 
than three centuries after the introduction of the Greek alphabet, was 
this stage transcended when writing was finally diffused through the 
Greek population and interiorised enough to affect thought processes 
generally. 

Another situation in which scribes can be perceived not simply as 
writers but as a group of élite craftsmen creating what might be defined as 
a luxury product, is the context of diplomatic contacts between the royal 
courts of the ancient Near East. The complex system of international 
correspondence that had developed in the Near East by the Late Bronze 
Age, primarily using the Akkadian cuneiform script as a littera franca, 
was influential not only in taking written communication onto another 
level (particularly in terms of translation to and from different languages 
and scripts), but also as part of a process by which scribes, and the 
documents they produced, effectively mediated between different élite 
groupings. Inevitably, some scribes — like doctors, sculptors, and other 
in-demand professionals — were sent from one royal court to another, 
in order to facilitate the reading and writing of foreign scripts. In the 
Maya culture, the capture of scribes from defeated groups was part of 
the process by which they were rendered ungovernable — this emphasises 
the degree to which ancient states and polities in many cultures relied on 
élite scribes and bureaucrats generally for basic functioning, in situations 
of highly restricted literacy (see Johnston 2001). 

For the Late Bronze Age, there is a great deal of archaeological and 
textual evidence for communities of scribes transplanted into a foreign 
royal court. The majority of the 380 clay cuneiform tablets (e.g. Fig. 3.3) 


32 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


Fig. 3.3. Cuneiform letter 
from Amarna, written by 
Tushratta, ruler of Mitanni, 
to Amenhotep III of Egypt, 
18th Dynasty, c. 1360 BC; 
unusually, it is annotated 
in hieratic for archival 
purposes, indicating 

that it dates to year 36 

of an unspecified ruler, 
presumably Amenhotep 

III (British Museum, 
WA29793, 9 x 7cm). 


in the well-known archive found in and around the Records Office at 
Amarna were letters forming part of the royal diplomatic correspondence 
with other states in western Asia and the east Mediterranean (in the 
period from c. 1360 to 1334 BC). Shlomo Izre’el, however, has published 
the 32 so-called ‘scholarly tablets? from the archive, providing some of 
the strongest evidence for the existence of a group of ‘cuneiform scribes’ 
living within the community at Amarna, perhaps on a semi-permanent 
basis (Izre’el 1997). The tablets include such genres as lexical lists, 
syllabaries, vocabularies, myths, and historical or literary narratives. The 
scribes who produced this range of texts must either have been Egyptian 
scribes who had acquired a close familiarity with the cuneiform script 
and associated languages through direct contact with foreigners, or 
perhaps non-Egyptian scribes sent to Amarna by their respective royal 
employers. In particular, Izre’el (1997: 12) argues that ‘The main site 
of scribal learning is, as far as we know, the site of the Records Office, 
where tablets — including letters — were kept ... it is here that students 


33 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


exercised cuneiform writing, learned Akkadian words and phrases, and 
were trained in reading Akkadian literature’. In addition, Izre’el (1997: 
9) points out that several blank, uninscribed clay tablets (now at the 
Ashmolean and the British Museum) were also found in the central city 
at Amarna, providing further evidence that an Akkadian-literate scribal 
community was located there, rather than just an archive. 

Izre’el (1997: 12) also argues that, in addition to Egyptian scribes 
learning Akkadian, there must have been ‘guest students from abroad’ 
sent by other Near Eastern courts, and that there were almost certainly 
also local cuneiform schools in Canaan’ (Kossmann 1994, Izre’el 1995). 
Von Damow (2004) proposes that such cuneiform-literate scribes were 
not writing the Akkadian language but simply using Akkadian signs 
to represent what was essentially their own Canaanite language, while 
Wilhelm (1984) has suggested that similarities between the texts on 
cuneiform tablets found at Amarna and Hattuša perhaps indicate 
that Hittites were at least partially responsible for teaching Akkadian 
cuneiform to Egyptian scribes. 

T'he petrographic analyses of about 300 of the Amarna tablets by Yuval 
Goren et al. (2004) have also been highly influential in filling in some of 
the cultural context of such groups of ‘expatriate’ scribes. Using highly 
specialised forms of petrography, designed specifically to minimise damage 
to the tablets, Goren has tracked down the provenances of the tablets, 
demonstrating in addition that some letters, made of local Egyptian clay, 
were probably archival duplicates of those actually received or sent. As far 
as the ‘scholarly tablets’ are concerned, Goren has been able to show that 
they were primarily made from Egyptian clay —- although this does not 
solve the question of whether the scribal school was populated primarily 
by Egyptian scribes or by foreign counterparts, it at least indicates the 
extent to which Egyptians embraced the cuneiform technology that was 
so alien to their traditional use of papyrus and brush. 

Such mobility and versatility, although relatively new to Egyptian 
scribes, as Egypt fully entered the cosmopolitan world of the Near East 
in the New Kingdom, was undoubtedly already much more a part of the 
routine of Near Eastern scribes, given the more heterogeneous nature of 
western Asiatic cultures and empires — certainly by the Assyrian period 
it became common to see depictions of pairs of scribes, one writing 
cuneiform script on a tablet or board and the other writing Aramaic 


34 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


on a sheet of papyrus (see, for instance, Wiseman 1955: pl. III.2), and 
the term sepiru — borrowed from Aramaic — was used in Babylon at this 
date to refer to bilingual administrators (Pearce 1999). It should not be 
forgotten, however, that clay tablets incised with cursive hieroglyphic 
script, have been found at Ayn Asil, an Old Kingdom settlement in 
the Dakhla oasis, indicating that surprisingly, about a thousand years 
earlier than the Amarna correspondence, at least one group of Egyptians 
had flirted with this alternative writing medium (see Soukiassian 1997). 
Intriguingly, there is also some evidence for the adoption of a set of exotic 
symbols incorporated into some Assyrian inscriptions dating to the reigns 
of Sargon II and Esarhaddon (e.g. British Museum WA 91027: ‘Lord 
Aberdeen’s Black Stone’, from the time of Esarhaddon), which may 
be an attempt by the Assyrian scribes and élite to imitate hieroglyphic 
writing (see Finkel and Reade 1996). As Radner (2009: 225) puts it The 
hieroglyphs ... cannot have failed to impress the members of a cultural 
environment that highly valued tradition and exclusivity in a writing 
system as a parallel to their own ancient cuneiform tradition, especially at 
a time when palaeography was a favourite and lively discipline of Assyrian 
cuneiform scribes’. The other side of this particular coin is demonstrated 
by the 19th-Dynasty London Medical Papyrus, which includes six 
incantations in northwest Semitic languages and one said to be in some 
form of Minoan language, transcribed into a syllabic form of Egyptian 
(see Grapow et al. 1958: 360, 434-5, Steiner 1992). These foreign 
spells were properly understood and integrated into the papyrus itself, 
as demonstrated by the interpolation of some Egyptian sentences amid 
the Semitic sections. The degree of religious integration here, between 
Egyptian and Syro-Palestinian ritual is indicated by a reference in one 
of the Semitic spells to the god Amun as rabunna (our lord’) associated 
with ‘my mother Ishtar’. The reason for this particular combination of 
Egyptian and Asiatic protective spells is perhaps indicated by the fact that 
the disease itself is described by the Semitic word hmktw (‘strangulation’), 
which suggests that the affliction may have been encountered outside 
Egypt, thus requiring powerful Asiatic rituals to deal with it effectively. 
For the early Iron Age, Radner (2009) discusses the reasonably extensive 
evidence for Egyptian scribes resident in the Assyrian court from the 8th 
to 6th centuries BC. One important source for this period is a set of 
documents from Nimrud listing wine rations from the reign of Adad- 


35 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Nirari III to that of Shalmaneser IV (<c. 810-773 BC), which includes 
references to many Egyptian craftworkers, including scribes, ‘exported’ 
to Assyria, even before Egypt had been conquered by Ashurbanipal in 
the early 7th century BC (Kinnier Wilson 1972, Zaccagnini 1983). From 
the reigns of Esarhaddon and Ashurbanipal alone, there are more than 
1300 surviving examples of letters and reports received by the Assyrian 
court, which suggests an extremely busy bureaucratic centre (Radner 
2009: 221). It is interesting to speculate how Egyptian scribes would 
have ended up at the Assyrian court at this date, and although Kinnier 
Wilson (1972: 93) suggests that they were somehow prisoners of war 
captured during Assyrian campaigns in Syria-Palestine, Zaccagnini 
(1983: 260) puts forward the more likely explanation that individual 
Egyptian artisans, including scribes, were already ‘possibly fleeing from 
their original work-place in search of better jobs abroad’, thus suggesting 
a degree of spontaneous personal mobility, rather than the enforced 
movement that is usually assumed. Zaccagnini (1983: 260) goes on to 
suggest that the situation in terms of mobility of artisans and professionals 
may have constituted a state of transition in the 1st millennium: ‘From 
a series of scattered sources, all we can propose with a reasonable degree 
of confidence is that in the course of the first millennium BC there 
was an emêrgence of new forms of the organization and employment of 
professional labor which do not seem to have existed in the third and 
second millennia BC.’ 

One Assyrian text dated to the period shortly after Esarhaddon’s defeat 
of Egypt in 671 BC comprises a list of specialised scholars resident at 
the Assyrian court, including astrologers, physicians, exorcists, diviners, 
and lamenters, who (according to Radner 2009: 223) represent the five 
traditional branches of Mesopotamian scholarship. The list also includes 
three bird-watchers’ (i.e. augurers, probably Syro-Anatolian in origin), 
three Egyptian scribes, and three partibe (the latter being an Assyrian 
term for Egyptian ritual experts of some kind). The phartibe only seem to 
appear at the Assyrian court after Esarhaddon’s conquest of Egypt, and 
indeed a list of specialists moved to Assyria after the defeat of Memphis 
includes ‘exorcists, bartibe [...], veterinary surgeons, Egyptian scribes, 
[...], snake charmers’ (Onasch 1994: I, 31-2). On the basis of these 
lists, it seems that the Egyptian specialisms that were most appreciated 
and exploited at the Egyptian court were dream interpretation (perhaps 


36 


3. Writing: human communication as social technology 


contributing to the increase in dream oracles in Ashurbanipal’s reign) 
and magico-medical expertise. As Radner (2009: 225) puts it: “While 
structurally the approach of Egyptian and Mesopotamian ritual experts 
had much in common, we can take it for granted that the Egyptian way 
of purifying and divining will have differed in detail from the routines 
of the Assyrian and Babylonian experts but most important of all the 
language in which incantations and prayers were performed was of course 
Egyptian, as were the gods the prayers were addressed to.’ 

This well-attested exchange of documents and scribes across the Near 
East would surely have not only formed part of the process of technology 
transfer in the late 2nd and 1st millennia (see Moorey 2001 and Shortland 
2004), but would also presumably have been the means by which a great 
deal of technical know-how was communicated and disseminated, i.e. 
via texts and highly educated scholars rather than simply by the physical 
import and export of skilled craftworkers, as was probably the case in the 
2nd millennium BC. 


Discussion 


Writing, therefore, can be seen to be initially fundamental as a kind 
of ‘enabling’ technology in itself, during the emergence of Egyptian 
civilisation in the late 4th millennium BC, providing the intellectual 
basis for later innovations and technological adaptations. But it can 
also be recognised as an important component in the process by which 
Egyptians exchanged ideas with other cultures in western Asia and the 
east Mediterranean, particularly at the beginning of the Late Bronze 
Age, when technologies and craftsmen were spreading more widely across 
western Asia and north Africa. As Moorey (2001: 6) points out, language 
and writing clearly reflect this process in the lexicography of technology: 
‘The impact of the technology of one region on that of another is likely 
to be most vividly indicated by the technical terms of foreign origin’. 
This observation is borne out by the work of archaeologists in the Nabta 
Playa-Kiseiba region of the eastern Sahara, in southwestern Egypt — sites 
in this area have yielded sherds from early Holocene pottery vessels, 
which are among the earliest ceramics in Africa. They make the point 
that ‘the terminology associated with cattle raising in the northern 
Sudanic division of the Nilo-Saharan languages was established before 


37 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


8500 BC, perhaps around the same time that the first pottery-making 
registered in the lexical data’ (Jérdeczka et al. 2011: 112). Even before 
language survives in written form, it forms an integral part of cultural 
packages associated with the spread of certain types of material culture, 
technology and subsistence pattern (see, for instance, Ehret 1978 and 
2006). However, it is only with the emergence of large quantities of 
textual evidence in the Late Bronze Age that the written word begins 
to provide crucial insights into technology transfer and the mobility of 
craftworkers in northeast Africa and the eastern Mediterranean. 


38 


Medicine, magic and pharmacy: 
the fusion of science and art 


Without art, science would be as useless as a pair of high forceps in 
the hands of a plumber. Without science, art would become a crude 
mess of folklore and emotional quackery. The truth of art keeps 
science from becoming inhuman, and the truth of science keeps art 
from becoming ridiculous (Raymond Chandler, 19 February 1938; 
published as Chandler 1976: 7). 


Problems in interpreting ancient medical systems and texts 


This chapter examines the fields of medicine, magic and pharmacy in 
ancient Egypt, and explores the degree to which a single area of Egyptian 
technical ability and thought incorporated several aspects of culture that 
would appear, to modern eyes, to be incompatible — science, religion 
and magic. To what extent can Egyptian medicine be regarded as a 
coherent, organised system of thought rather than a largely arbitrary 
mass of traditional remedies and superstitions? Longrigg (1998: 18), for 
instance, argues that Egyptian and Mesopotamian physicians regarded 
diseases as “manifestations of the anger of the gods’, in contrast to the 
‘rational and theoretical systems of medicine free from magical and 
religious elements” practised by the Greeks. Weeks (1976-8: 297), on 
the other hand, points out that ‘The arrangement and combination of 
drugs in P. Ebers suggest that drugs were systematically applied in the 
treatment of medical disorders by persons whose knowledge of materia 
medica was more sophisticated than some writers on ancient medicine 
have previously thought ... They reflect a higher degree of rational and 
empirical thought than we have given them credit for. 

The field of ancient Egyptian medicine might appear to have been 


39 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


well covered by publications from the mid- to late 20th century, which 
are primarily compendia of less than a dozen major texts identified as 
medical in nature (e.g. Grapow et al. 1954-73 and Bardinet 1995), as well 
as by more popularly targeted publications (e.g. Nunn 1996 and Halioua 
and Ziskind 2005). However, this area of Egyptian technology, in its 
broadest sense, remains a potentially fruitful source of potential insights 
into Egyptian thought and ‘science’. 


The so-called ‘medical’ papyri 


A number of surviving papyri (fourteen relatively complete examples 
and several fragments) provide information concerning the Egyptians’ 
knowledge of healing and the nature of the human body (see Bardinet 
1995 for the most recent translations of each; in the discussion below, 
earlier translations are also cited). Such texts may have been housed in 
temple archives (the pr nb, or ‘house of life”), although the only evidence 
for this is the assertion of the Greek physician Galen (c. 129-99 AD), 
in volume two of his De compositione medicamentorum, that the ancient 
temple archives at Memphis were being consulted by Greek and Roman 
doctors of his own time (Ghalioungui 1973: 66). 

The earliest surviving example of an Egyptian medical text is the 12th- 
Dynasty Lahun Medical Papyrus (Petrie Museum, UC 32057; c. 2100- 
1900 BC; Griffith 1898: 5-11, pls 5-6, Collier and Quirke 2004: 58-64), 
which may also be the original source for the later Ramesseum IV-V and 
Carlsberg VIII papyri (Gardiner 1955 and Iversen 1939 respectively). It 
deals mainly with gynaecological ailments, particularly issues relating to 
the womb, fertility and contraception. The Kahun settlement has also 
yielded a few other papyri relating to the healing process, including one 
comprising prescriptions for treating animals (UC 32036; Collier and 
Quirke 2004: 54-7). 

The 18th-Dynasty Ebers Medical Papyrus (University of Leipzig; c. 
1555 BC) is the longest and probably also the best-known textual source 
for Egyptian medicine; it was originally over 20m long and consisted 
simply of a list of some 876 prescriptions and remedies for such ailments 
as wounds, stomach complaints, gynaecological problems and skin 
irritations. The Ebers Papyrus would appear to have already been well 
translated and analysed by such scholars as Wreszinski (1913), Ebbell 


40 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


(1937), Ghalioungui (1987) and Bardinet (1995: 251-374), but in reality 
recent research suggests that more can be extracted from this document 
by using innovative techniques of analysis. Fukagawa (2011), for instance, 
has taken a statistical approach to its terminology, signalling the need 
to deal with these fragmentary texts relating to Egyptian medicine in a 
more consciously ‘scientific’ and positivist fashion. 

The early 18th-Dynasty Edwin Smith Medical Papyrus (New York 
Academy of Medicine; c. 1600 BC; Westendorf 1966, Bardinet 1995: 
493-522), possibly deriving from the same tomb as the Ebers Papyrus, 
was once thought to be the work of a military surgeon, but recent 
opinion suggests that its author may have been a doctor associated with a 
workforce concerned with stone masonry construction (e.g. Brandt-Rauf 
and Brandt-Rauf 1987). The text deals mainly with such problems as 
broken bones, dislocations and crushings, dividing its forty-eight cases 
into three classes: ‘an ailment which I will treat’, ‘an ailment with which 
I will contend’ and an ‘ailment not to be treated’. The symptoms of each 
case are described and where possible a remedy prescribed. Although it 
cannot be claimed that the writer fully understood the concept of the 
circulation of the blood, he clearly recognised that the condition of the 
heart could be judged by the pulse (as with section 854a of the Ebers 
Papyrus, quoted above): The counting of anything with the fingers [is 
done] to recognise the way the heart goes. There are vessels in it leading 
to every part of the body ... When a Sekhmet priest, any swnw doctor ... 
puts his fingers to the head ... to the two hands, to the place of the heart 
.. it speaks ... in every vessel, every part of the body’ (Smith Papyrus, 
section 1: Bardinet 1995: 493-4). 

The 18th-Dynasty Hearst Papyrus (University of California; c. 1550 
BC; Wreszinski 1912, Bardinet 1995: 375-408) is inscribed with 260 
prescriptions, a number of which deal with broken bones and bites 
(including that of the hippopotamus). Prescriptions such as those 
described in the papyri listed here were made up in proportions according 
to fractions based on parts of the eye of Horus, each part symbolising a 
fraction from 1/64 to 1/2. 

The 19th-Dynasty Berlin Papyrus (Berlin 3038; c. 1250 BC; Wreszinski 
1909; Bardinet 1995: 409-36), which comprises over 204 paragraphs, was 
discovered in a pottery vessel buried over 3m below the surface of the sand 
in the Saqqara region. Consisting, like the Kahun papyrus, primarily of 


41 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


gynaecological remedies and diagnoses, it is the only surviving medical 
text that preserves a reference to the scribe who composed it, described 
as ‘scribe of the sacred writings, chief of excellent physicians (swnw), 
[who made] the book’. A smaller, slightly earlier, medical papyrus at 
Berlin Museum (Berlin 3027) dates to the 18th Dynasty and has the title 
“book of protection for mother and child’. 

The 30th-Dynasty Brooklyn Papyrus (Brooklyn Museum 47.218.48 
and 47.218.85; Sauneron 1989, Bardinet 1995: 523-46) deals with 
snake bites and scorpion stings at great length, while the Chester 
Beatty VI Papyrus (British Museum; c. 1200 BC; Bardinet 1995: 455- 
60) is concerned only with ailments relating to the anus. The London 
Medical Papyrus (Wreszinski 1912, Bardinet 1995: 483-92) is one of 
the best examples of the Egyptian three-pronged approach to healing, 
which might be described as holistic in modern terms. It consists of a 
combination of magical spells, rituals and practical prescriptions, all of 
which would have presumably been considered equally essential to the 
recovery of the patient. 


Interpreting Egyptian ‘medical’ texts 


One of the main problems with the surviving texts concerning Egyptian 
medicine is that the majority essentially seem to list prescriptions rather 
than providing direct insights into medical thinking and principles, 
including such features as pharmacotherapy, diagnosis, prognosis, 
pathology, and aetiology. This, however, takes us back to the fundamental 
problem discussed at the beginning of Chapter 2: should we analyse 
ancient scientific or technological texts by means of modern terms 
(which might be considered inappropriate or anachronistic) or should we 
attempt to discuss them via the ancient terms and ideas (which we may 
be misunderstanding or misinterpreting). How legitimate or feasible is 
it to attempt to locate or identify such recently defined phenomena as 
diagnosis and aetiology in an ancient medical system, when such terms 
might not be applicable or relevant to the cultural construction being 
studied? 

T'he problem is expressed very clearly by Fukagawa (2011: 18) when he 
discusses Greek, Chinese and Ayurvedic medicine in an attempt to place 
ancient Egyptian medicine in a broader cultural context: “The notion of 


42 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


bodily vital force, that also plays an important role in the medicines of 
the three cultures, is called pneuma in Greek, qi in Chinese and prana 
in Ayurveda. There are similarities among these, but misconceptions 
may occur when the significance of their differences is not understood. 
The translation of these terms into the western concept of “energy”, 
for instance, can lead to obvious misunderstandings for someone who 
has no access to ancient or traditional culture.” In other words, cross- 
cultural comparisons or interpretations of ancient systems of medicine 
must be based not only on secure translations but also on a sufficiently 
deep knowledge of the full cultural context of each medical system, so as 
to avoid erroneous assumptions concerning similarities or differences in 
medical approaches. 

Lloyd (2004: 30) has also discussed this issue with regard to ancient 
Chinese and Greek medical science and knowledge, pointing out 
that ‘where the Greeks generally focused on the study of structures 
and organisms, in China the emphasis was more often on processes, 
on interaction, on resonances’. In other words, this is not simply a 
terminological problem. It delves much deeper into the basic approaches 
that ancient and modern cultures take to the human body, the way that 
the body operates, and such important concepts as the well-being’ of the 
body, which medicine usually seeks to maintain or achieve, but which 
may be defined very differently in different cultures’ medical systems 
(themselves inevitably influenced by idiosyncratic beliefs and attitudes, 
see Rautman 2000, Meskell and Joyce 2003). A good instance of this 
kind of difficulty in the study of Egyptian medicine is the question 
of how the Egyptian terms mt (pl. mtw) and whd (pl. whdw) should 
be translated. The term mtw appears in the Ebers, Hearst and Berlin 
papyri and is frequently translated as ‘vessels’, although it also appears 
in contexts suggesting that it refers not only to blood vessels but also 
to tendons, muscles, and perhaps nerves, as well as other ducts passing 
through the body. The fact that it refers to conduits of some kind is 
suggested partly by the fact that disease and various physical substances 
(air, semen, water, blood and urine) are said to pass through the mtuw. 
The term wpdw is also frequently used in the Ebers Papyrus, and the most 
common translation is ‘corruption’; thus Ritner (2000: 107-8) translates 
the title of the Berlin Medical papyrus 3038 as ‘Book for driving out 
corruption (wbdw) from all the limbs of a man’. The ways in which 


43 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


these two crucial terms are translated vary from one scholar to another, 
since their evident specificity within the Egyptian conceptualisation of 
the human body and disease makes it extremely difficult to find modern 
equivalents. 


The nature of Egyptian medicine 


Egyptian medicine was a mixture of magical and religious spells with 
remedies based on close study of patients, and any attempt to impose 
the modern distinction between ‘magic and ‘medicine’ is likely to 
confuse the picture. Thus, modern western cultures tend to distinguish 
clearly between the use of prayers, medicine or ‘magic’, whereas in 
ancient Egypt these three categories were regarded as overlapping and 
complementary. The Egyptians might attempt to solve a single problem, 
whether a disease or a hated rival, by using a mixture of magical rituals 
or treatments (sw), medicinal prescriptions (pprt) and religious texts 
(rw). This combination appears strange from the perspective of modern 
western chemo-therapeutic medicine, but the latter has only become the 
dominant paradigm for medicine in relatively recent times. As Ritner 
(2001: 326) has pointed out, the dearth of holistic studies of Egyptian 
magico-medicine derives at least in part from blinkered Egyptological 
attitudes to the topic: ‘rational treatments have been the focus of detailed 
study, while magical aspects are often marginalised and their significance 
to the ancient audience is undervalued’. 

Although Greek and Roman medical systems began to lay the 
foundations for modern scientific medicine, they were to some extent 
rooted, like much ofancient medicine, in a world-view whereby science and 
religion were not yet regarded as opposites, but rather as complementary 
means to understanding the nature of humanity and the cosmos. Brisson 
(2000: 45) points out the importance of the temple as home to a central 
tradition of Greek medicine: ‘Moreover two aspects helped to reconcile 
“rational” medicine and temple medicine. The priests used medications, 
dietary prescriptions and phlebotomy. Certain “rationalist? doctors, for 
their part, used some of the same terms that also appeared in religious 
contexts, for example “purification”. 

In the Ptolemaic period (332-30 Bc) Greek forms of medicine appear 
to have been combined with those of the Egyptians, leading to a huge 


44 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


upsurge of medical knowledge in Alexandria in particular, evidently 
fuelled in part by royal patronage. Ptolemy II and III seem to have been 
particularly instrumental in providing bodies of criminals for vivisection, 
thus aiding the studies of anatomists such as Herophilus and Erasistratus 
(see Lloyd 1975, von Staden 1989 and Vallance 2000: 96-7), who were able 
to identify the nervous system and the blood-vascular system. However, a 
crucial distinction needs to be made between ‘rational’ medicine and truly 
scientific medicine, given that the kind of rational medicine promoted by 
Herophilus in the first half of the 3rd century BC not only continued in 
very much the same way until late antiquity but also still incorporated 
many aspects of ‘pre-scientific medicine — advances in understanding 
of human anatomy and physiology were not easily converted into real 
achievements in therapy and treatment of ailments (Pellegrin 2000: 
430-2). In other words, truly scientific medicine, in something like the 
modern sense of the phrase, did not begin to be practised until the time 
of Galen in the mid-2nd century AD. 

It was also in the Ptolemaic period that the deified Imhotep, long 
closely linked with Egyptian medicine, became identified with the 
Greek god Asklepios, and the Asklepieion at Saqqara was established 
as a centre for healing. Patients sometimes also stayed overnight in so- 
called incubation chambers at such temples, as in the cult-place of Bes 
at Saqqara, in the hope of receiving a cure through divinely inspired 
dreams. From the Late Period (747-332 BC) onwards, sanatoria were 
often attached to major temples, such as the cult-centre of Hathor at 
Dendera (Daumas 1956). 


Magic (bk3) as an integral part of medical ‘science’ 


A somewhat artificial distinction is usually made between the religious 
texts in Egyptian tombs and temples and the ‘magical texts’ or ‘spells? that 
were intended to solve the everyday problems of individuals. Different 
types of Egyptian magical texts range from the Book of Gates in New 
Kingdom royal tombs (Hornung 1999, Wiebach-Koepke 2003) to curses 
inscribed on ostraca (e.g. O. Armytage 6-9, see Shorter 1936), or spells 
to cure such ailments as snake bites or scorpion stings (e.g. O. Colin 
Campbell 14, see McDowell 1993: 18-19, pls XVIII-IXa), but all of 
them would have presumably been regarded by the Egyptians as roughly 


45 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


comparable methods of gaining divine/supernatural assistance for human 
problems. All employed hk3 (which can be defined as something like 
divine energy and knowledge of magic), a force that was manifested in 
the form of the god Heka (Velde 1970). The latter was one of the three 
aspects of primeval potency (Heka, Hu and Sia) that empowered the 
creator-god at the beginning of time. 

The royal uraeus, perhaps the most vivid symbol of the pharaoh’s 
power, was sometimes described as wrt bk3w: ‘great of magic’, while the 
king himself, from at least the Old Kingdom onwards, was thought to 
resemble the gods in having access to the power of Heka, Hu and Sia 
(Silverman 1991: 65). Probably the best-known literary description of 
the practice of magic in Egypt is a fictional narrative composed in the 
Middle Kingdom (2055-1650 BC) and preserved on the 18th-Dynasty 
Papyrus Westcar (P. Berlin 3033, Blackman 1988). This text describes 
various marvels performed by the magicians Djadjaemankh and Djedi at 
the courts of Sneferu and Khufu in the 4th Dynasty (2613-2494 BC). 
Whereas magic, in the modern sense of the word, has become relatively 
peripheral to the established religions, in ancient Egypt it lay at the very 
heart of religious ritual and liturgy. This, however, has not always been 
properly recognised, and as Ritner (1993: 4-5) points out: ‘Bounded 
by religion on the one hand, and on the other by medicine, magic has 
been considered inferior to both and has often received only perfunctory 
treatment in the study of either.’ 

Since magic was above all the means by which the restoration of 
all forms of cosmic order and harmony could be ensured, it was not 
surprisingly considered to be essential to ‘medical restoration of human 
well-being. As in many other cultures the techniques employed by 
Egyptian magicians and physicians were frequently based on the idea of 
imitation — the belief that the replication of a name, image or mythical 
event could produce an effect in the real world (see Shirakawa 2006). The 
imitation of names meant that verbal trickery, such as puns, metaphors 
and acrostics, were regarded as powerful forms of magic rather than 
simply literary skills — according to Assmann (2001: 87), ‘wordplay 
was regarded as a highly serious and controlled use of language’. In the 
case of the execration texts, the act of smashing ostraca or figurines 
bearing the names of enemies was considered to be an effective way 
of thwarting them. Similarly, the creation of statuettes or figurines of 


46 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


gods or enemies, which could then be either propitiated or mutilated, 
was regarded as an effective way of gaining control over evil forces. In 
a sophisticated combination of verbal, visual and physical imitation, it 
was believed that water poured over cippi of Horus (stelae depicting 
Horus the child defeating snakes, scorpions and other dangers) would 
confer healing on those who drank it (Jelinkova-Reymond 1956, Ritner 
1989). The most common cure for maladies was probably the amulet 
or the magic spell rather than medical prescriptions alone (see Pinch 
1994: 104-19), since many illnesses tended to be regarded as the result 
of malignant influences or incorrect behaviour. 


Magico-medical practitioners 


The overlap between science and religion in ancient Egypt is also apparent 
in the process of identifying individuals and professions connected with 
healing and bodily well-being. At least as early as the 3rd Dynasty (2686- 
2613 BC), there were already individuals who practised as healers of some 
kind, for whom the term swnw was used. One of the reasons that the 
term swnw is thought to come closest to the idea of a doctor or physician 
is that it survives with roughly this sense in the Coptic word saein. There 
are, however, also several texts in which the word would most rationally 
be translated as ‘herbalist or ‘pharmacist (e.g. Ebers Papyrus 188, see 
Bardinet 1995: 276). There are also a number of administrative titles 
(brp, bry, imy-r, shd and wr swnw) suggesting a hierarchy among swnw 
from at least the Old Kingdom onwards. 

The titles of Hesyra (Fig. 4.1), an official of the time of the 3rd- 
Dynasty ruler Djoser (2667-2648 BC), included the posts of wr 
ibhy (chief of those who take care of teeth’) and wr swnw (chief of 
physicians’). His mastaba tomb (S2405), located to the north of the Step 
Pyramid at Saqqara, was discovered by Auguste Mariette in the 1880s, 
and re-excavated, about thirty years later, by James Quibell (see Quibell 
1913). The earliest surviving mummified body of a swnw is that of the 
6th-Dynasty royal physician Qar, whose mastaba tomb was excavated at 
Saqqara in 2001; his well-preserved burial included a selection of small 
copper tools that may well be surgical implements (Hawass 2003: 162-6). 

There are several other titles associated with Egyptian magico-medical 
activity, the most important and frequent of which seem to have been 


47 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 4.1. One of the wooden funerary stelae of Hesyra, a medical official in the reign of the 
3rd-Dynasty ruler Djoser (Egyptian Museum, Cairo, JE28504, h. of complete stele 114cm). 


48 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


the wb-priests of the goddess Sekhmet (see Jonckheere 1951), the 
sw (literally ‘protectors’ or ‘amulet-men’”), and the prpw (or s3w) srkt 
(‘administrators/controllers of the scorpion-goddess Selket’; see Kãnel 
1984). Halioua and Ziskind (2005: 11) have suggested that there might 
be some grounds for paralleling the swnw, on the one hand, with the 
ancient Greek trained medical practitioner (iatros), and the s3w, wb- 
priest and þrp srkt on the other, with the Greek divinely inspired healer 
(biereus), but this seems too simplistic a suggestion, given our lack of 
real understanding of the connotations and subtleties of any of these 
Egyptian terms/ titles. 

Additionally, it should be noted that there were quite a number of 
individuals from the Old Kingdom onwards who held two or three of 
these magico-medical titles simultaneously, such as the 4th-Dynasty swnw 
Iry (attested by his funerary stele at Giza, see Junker 1928: 63), who was 
also a þrp srkt, and the Sth-Dynasty official Ptahhotep buried at Saqqara, 
who held the title ‘overseer of the priests of Sekhmet of the palace, swnw 
(see Boulu 1990: 55). Graffiti 15 and 21 at the Hatnub travertine quarries 
provide the names and attributes of two First Intermediate Period priests 
of the goddess Sekhmet: one called Heryshefnakht, who is also identified 
as an imy-r hk3w (overseer of magicians’) and wr swnw n nsw (kings 
chief physician”), and another called Ahanakht, also apparently having 
medical skills (Anthes 1928: 33-5, 47, Tf19-20; Shaw 2010a: 147, 150). 

Section 854a of the Ebers Papyrus (one of the most important ‘medical’ 
papyri discussed above) is particularly interesting in this regard, since it is 
a kind of gloss to the main text that specifically refers to the swnw, wb- 
priest of Sekhmet and s3w as if they are broadly comparable as practitioners 
of medicine: “There are vessels in him to all his limbs. As to these: if any 
swnw, any wb-priest of Sekhmet or any s3w places his two hands or his 
fingers on the head, on the back of the head, on the hands, on the place 
of the heart, on the two arms or on each of the two legs, he measures 
the heart because of its vessels to all his limbs. It speaks from the vessels 
of all the limbs.’ As well as implying that all three of these healers’ titles 
are comparable, this passage of course has also been interpreted by some 
scholars (e.g. Nunn 1996: 113) as evidence for the Egyptians’ awareness of 
the heart beat, the pulse and the links between the two. 

To what extent did Egyptian medical knowledge and practice derive 
from the process of mummification, and the existence of individuals skilled 


49 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


in certain aspects of dissection? It is often stated that the Egyptians must 
have gained some of their medical experience as a byproduct of funerary 
processing of human and animal corpses. It is clear, however, that it would 
be incorrect to suppose that this long history of dissection (of a kind) 
provided the Egyptians with a good knowledge of the workings of the 
human body. The purpose of numerous organs remained unknown; for 
example, although it was known that brain damage could cause paralysis, 
it was not realised that the brain had anything to do with the act of 
thinking, an activity which the Egyptians ascribed to the heart. The 
purpose of the kidneys was also unknown, and the various appearances of 
the term mtw suggest a belief that all bodily fluids, such as blood, urine, 
excrement and semen, were constantly circulating around the body. 

Egyptian doctors appear to have been mainly men, since there is only 
one possible attestation of a woman doctor (Peseshet, in the 5th/6th 
Dynasty), although this evidence may well be biased, given that the 
principal sources are inscriptions on funerary monuments, most of which 
were created for men rather than women. Peseshet’s stele, found in the 
tomb of Akhethotep (perhaps her son) at Giza, identified her as imy-r 
swnwt, and opinions differ as to how this title should be translated: ‘chief 
of female physicians’ seems most likely, but it is also possible that she 
was a female overseer of male physicians (see Ghalioungui 1983: 18-19 
and Nunn 1996: 124-5). 

The Greek historian Herodotus, writing in the 5th century BC, 
claimed that Egyptian doctors each had their own specialisations, such 
as gynaecology or osteopathy, and there is certainly some evidence for 
titles indicating some degree of specialism in the Pharaonic period. 
Nunn (1996: 118-19) notes that there are many officials holding the 
title swnw followed by a body part, such as pt (body — perhaps in this 
context specifically the abdomen) or irty (eyes). The role of the prp 
srkt, or ‘controller of the scorpion goddess Selket’, seems to have been 
primarily concerned with the treatment of scorpion stings and snake 
bites — as often in Egyptian culture, the deity chosen to protect from 
a phenomenon is actually the one that personifies it (just as wb-priests 
of Sekhmet combat disease precisely because the epithets and myths of 
the lioness-goddess Sekhmet suggest that one of her main functions is 
to spread pestilence). The early Ptolemaic (or perhaps 30th-Dynasty) 
Brooklyn Museum papyrus (Brooklyn 47, 218.48 and 47, 218.85; see 


50 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


Sauneron 1989 and Bardinet 1995: 523-46) provides some context to 
the prp srkt title, since it consists of two sections: the first dealing with 
the identification of different types of serpent and the second providing 
advice on the treatment of patients suffering from snake bites or scorpion 
stings. In the titular section, paragraph 39, at the beginning of the 
second part of the papyrus, specific reference is made to the prp srkt as 
the main individual involved in providing such treatment: ‘Compendium 
that serves to prepare the remedies to extract the venom of each male 
and each female snake, each scorpion, each tarantula (?), each reptile; 
compendium that is in the hands of the prp srkt, and that serves to drive 
away all reptiles and render their mouths ineffective’ (see Bardinet 1995: 
528). Some of the subsequent remedies (e.g. paragraphs 42 and 44) 
include references to the intervention of a prp srkt as an important part 
of the process. Both the snake descriptions and the remedies comprise a 
combination of rational data and magical or religious associations. 

The sense of ‘healing technology’ as an Egyptian science in which 
several radically different strategies were employed is clearly exemplified 
by the magico-medicinal contents of the shaft tomb of a priest of the late 
Middle Kingdom (c. 1700 BC) excavated from beneath the Ramesseum in 
western Thebes (Quibell 1898: 3). The funerary equipment found in this 
tomb incorporated ‘religious’ and ‘magical’ artefacts alongside medical 
papyri. The artefacts included a female fertility figurine, a bronze cobra- 
wand, a statuette of a woman wearing a lion mask and holding two snake- 
wands, an ivory clapper, and a fragment of a magic rod. There was also 
a wooden box containing papyri inscribed with a wide range of religious, 
literary and magical texts, including three medical documents (Gardiner 
1955). This single collection of equipment clearly demonstrates the 
wide spectrum of strategies that could have been involved in Egyptian 
medicine and magic, enabling an individual practitioner to utilise divine 
and physical resources in order to achieve several different aims. It thus 
provides physical artefactual evidence to back up the impression given by 
study of the titulary alone. 


Conservatism and innovation in Egyptian magic and medicine 


One ofthe most crucial aspects ofancient Egyptian science and technology, 
and one that is also central to the study of Egyptian medicine, is the 


51 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


question of ancient attitudes to change and progress. To what degree were 
these medical practitioners open to innovation, or were their methods 
quintessentially rooted in tradition and previous convention? At least two 
of the surviving ‘medical papyri include sections that essentially spell out 
their pedigree as ancient documents, in much the same way as some of 
the Book of the Dead papyri (see Ritner 1993: 202). There can therefore 
be little doubt that most magico-medical texts were considered to draw 
much of their potency from their longevity and archaism — the older 
the spell or medicinal recipe the more likely that it could be drawing to 
some extent on the original primordial magic associated with Heka, Hu 
and Sia, the three manifestations of divine potency. It is clear, however, 
that some of the surviving texts not only pay lip-service to this idea but 
in fact are genuinely copied from much earlier documents — the Edwin 
Smith Papyrus (Breasted 1930), for instance, dates to c. 1500 BC but it 
includes occasional grammatical features that indicate an original source 
text dating back to the Old Kingdom, perhaps as much as a millennium 
earlier. Although only fourteen examples of medical texts have survived 
from a period of two thousand years, the whole magico-medical genre 
seems to be based on a combination of archaism and genuinely ancient 
‘wisdom’. 

Ritner (2000), however, has explored this issue in an intriguing article, 
in which he argues that the Egyptian texts concerned with healing 
have an innate tendency to stress adherence to longstanding traditions 
and ancient learning, but that they also sometimes contain evidence 
to suggest that innovation was both permissible and desirable. First 
he points out the frequent references made to other sources (e.g. the 
phrase ‘another book says”), indicating a scholarly comparing of ideas by 
the medical practitioners, allowing them to choose proactively between 
different possibilities, while still maintaining of course that these sources 
are all embedded in ancient wisdom. Secondly he cites the London 
Medical Papyrus (discussed above in Chapter 3) as a good example of the 
Egyptians’ readiness to adopt foreign incantations in order to create the 
most efficacious remedy for a particular affliction. 

Thirdly, discussing the general tendency for Egyptians to disseminate 
and absorb medical (and other) ideas at the Assyrian and Persian royal 
courts, he turns to the latest surviving Egyptian medical text: the so- 
called Crocodilopolis Medical Book (P. Vienna 6257) for its instances of 


52 


4. Medicine, magic and pharmacy 


Fig. 4.2. Relief depiction of surgical instruments on the inner face of the enclosure wall of the 
temple of Horus-the-elder and Sobek at Kom Ombo, dating to the Roman period. 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


new/outside influences on Egyptian medical practice (see, with caution, 
Reymond 1976). Written in demotic and dating to the 2nd century AD, 
this papyrus includes a large number of plant and mineral ingredients 
that are not previously mentioned in the earlier corpus of documents; 
Ritner (2000: 113) argues that this pharmaceutical expansion owes 
more to the international trade (encouraged initially by the Achaemenid 
empire) than to specific Classical influences. Fourthly, he notes that 
the famous depiction of surgical instruments on the inner face of the 
enclosure wall of the temple of Horus-the-elder and Sobek at Kom 
Ombo (Fig. 4.2), which also dates to the 2nd century AD, incorporates 
some artefacts that are clearly Roman rather than Egyptian (e.g. scalpels 
and a sponge, see Nunn 1996 for discussion and bibliography). The 
point that Ritner makes is that, rather than arguing that this adoption of 
Roman medical equipment necessarily indicates Egyptian technological 
decline and conservatism, it should instead be interpreted as evidence 
of Egyptian doctors’ openness to fresh ideas and innovative utensils: 
‘Like the Demotic Vienna Papyrus, the Kom Ombo relief seems proof 
of innovation and adaptation but within a still vibrant medical tradition’ 
(Ritner 2000: 114). 


54 


Stone-working: the synthesis of traditional 


chaînes opératoires and ideological innovations 


Egyptian conservatism should not be misconstrued as resistance 
to new or different ideas but recognized instead as a reluctance to 
discard completely society’s valued, older conceptions. As with 
Egyptian religious speculation, notions both old and new were 
preserved for scholarly consideration (Robert Ritner 2000: 110). 


Architectural types were less amenable to mechanical production, 
and had a more complex evolution. They had a very real existence in 
the minds of the Egyptians, but gave rise to broader scope in their 
realization as structures and buildings. Even more than with art, 
Pharaonic architecture reveals how tradition was invented (Kemp 
2006: 142-3). 


The earliest traces of hominid technology tend to survive in the form 
of knapped stone tools, and indeed the first known artefacts found 
in Egypt are large stone Acheulean-style hand-axes, currently dated 
to the Lower Palaeolithic (c. 400-300,000 BP; see Hendrickx and 
Vermeersch 2000: 18-20, and see also Fig. 1.1 above), and probably 
produced by groups of Homo erectus. According to Hikade (2010: 
2) ‘it remains surprising that the handax was so long-lasting, and 
dominated flint tools for several hundreds of thousands of years. One 
reason for this conservatism may have been the inability of early 
humans to fully integrate knapping skills and toolkits with knowledge 
of the environment.’ The traces of stone procurement also go back 
to an unusually early date in the Nile valley, with the earliest known 
chert and flint mines, in the Qena region of Upper Egypt, dating 


55 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


to the Middle Palaeolithic period (c. 50,000 BP, Vermeersch and 
Paulissen 1997). 

The long history of the working of stone in ancient Egypt represents a 
considerable trek from the chipping and flaking of flint and chert hand- 
held tools to the gigantic masonry of the limestone, granite and basalt 
funerary complexes of the Old Kingdom (Stocks 2003b, Romer 2007), 
and, many centuries later, the vast stone Greco-Roman temples at such 
sites as Edfu and Dendera (Arnold 1999). For the first few hundred 
thousand years of human history in northeastern Africa, the principal 
craft products to have survived were stone tools of two different types: 
ground stone and chipped stone. 

Ground stone lithics, such as axes, adzes, pounders and picks, were 
primarily made from such hard stones as granodiorite, gneiss and 
dolerite, and the functions they performed were mostly as heavy-duty 
tools for such tasks as quarrying and wood-working. Chipped stone 
lithics, on the other hand, mostly comprise flint or chert, shaped into 
core, flake or blade tools; they were used for lighter tasks such as food 
preparation, leather-working, harvesting and drilling. Both ground and 
chipped stone lithics continued to be utilised many centuries after the 
conventional end of the Neolithic, being used for numerous utilitarian 
and ritual purposes, alongside the copper alloy tools more readily 
associated with the pharaonic period (see, for instance, Hikade 2002 for 
the lithic industries of Old Kingdom Elephantine, and Tillmann 1992 
for the lithics of New Kingdom Qantir). A scene in the 12th-Dynasty 
tomb of Amenemhat at Beni Hasan shows flint knives being produced 
en-masse by a group of workers (BH2; Griffith 1896: 33-8, pls VI-X, 
Snape and Tyldesley 1983; see Fig. 5.1), and numerous Old Kingdom 
tomb scenes show the use of large flint knives for animal slaughtering 
(e.g. the ŠSth-Dynasty tombs of Ptahhotep and Ty at Saqqara, see Davies 
1901: pl. XXIII (Ptahhotep), and Junker 1953: Abb. 88a (Ty); see Fig. 
5.2). There are many examples from different times, cultures and places 
of the relatively harmonious juxtaposition of radically different stages 
of technology, as Cuomo (2007: 55) points out: “The co-existence of 
different stages of a technology is an extremely common phenomenon, 
and it does not require more explanation ... than the fact that, as of 
2006, despite the introduction of the internet-connected mobile phone, 
many people still write letters by hand on paper.’ 


56 


5. Stone-working 


Fig. 5.1. Scene in the 12th-Dynasty tomb of Amenemhat at Beni Hasan (BH2) showing flint 
knives being produced. 


Some of the specialised stone tools produced in the late Predynastic 
and Early Dynastic period are among the finest examples of Egyptian 
craftwork of any period and in any material (Holmes 1992, Hikade 
2010). It appears that flint-knapping in the late Predynastic period was 
gradually transformed from a fairly widespread technology to one that 
was practised by highly specialised knappers producing prestigious items 
for the emerging élite of the Naqada II and III periods. Grave 66 at 
Kadero, dating to the Khartoum Neolithic (c. 4500-3500 BC), yielded 
the body of a man aged 18-25 years along with a complete set of tools 
for knapping quartz tools, suggesting that the idea of stone-working 
specialists in northeast Africa can be extended back as early as the Sth 
millennium BC (Kobusiewicz 1996: 354). 


57 


of butchery in the 5th-Dynasty tomb of Ptahhotep at Saqqara. 


Fig. 5.2. Scene 


5. Stone-working 


Ripple-flaked knives, sometimes with gold or ebony handles, have 
virtually always been found in either funerary or religious contexts and 
were therefore almost certainly used for ritual purposes; their elaborate 
production process involved shallow unifacial surface retouch, edge 
retouch, fine seriation at the cutting edge, and polishing of one face 
(Midant-Reynes 1987). The scale of some of the ritual ripple-flaked 
knives produced in the late Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods is, on 
occasion, quite colossal, as in the case of a 50-cm-long knife excavated 
at Tell el-Farkha in the eastern Delta (Cialowicz et al. 2007: 28, fig. 36b) 
and a 72-cm-long knife excavated from the funerary complex of the 2nd- 
Dynasty ruler Khasekhemwy at Abydos (Hikade 1997). 

Pressure-flaked fishtail knives/lance heads’ (almost certainly the 
prehistoric precursors of the ps¥-kf knife used for the ‘opening of the 
mouth’ ritual in the pharaonic period) are also recognised as complex and 
gracefully crafted artefacts (see Hikade 2003, and see also the discussion 
of the material culture of mummification ritual in Chapter 6 below). 
Some examples (e.g. Harvard 13.3915, dating to Naqada Ia, from tomb 
825 at Mesaeed, see Harvey 1988) incorporated protrusions to allow 
attachment of a haft, and a Naqada II example found in tomb N7625 
at Naga ed-Dêr had a 9-cm-long wooden haft still in place (Lythgoe 
and Dunham 1965: 409, fig. 184). Since the fine denticulations along 
the cutting edges of these knives seem to be rarely worn or broken on 
surviving examples (see Fig. 5.3), it seems likely that they were used 
for purely ritual purposes, and many seem to have been deliberately 
broken at the time of burial (Lythgoe and Dunham 1965: 309-10). Flint 
examples of this artefact are rare after the 1st Dynasty (and only one 
surviving flint fishtail knife later than the 6th Dynasty has survived, see 
van Walsem 1978-79: 231), but the shape is imitated in other materials, 
including other types of stone (particularly limestone and travertine, see 
van Walsem 1978-79: 224-5). 

In late Predynastic Hierakonpolis, particularly at the late Predynastic 
religious structure HK29A, this flowering of flint-working took the 
unusual form of a group of about fifty pressure-flaked animal sculptures 
(representing cows, goats, hippopotami, ibex and dogs), probably used 
as votive offerings (Friedman 2000). These impressive, and uniquely 
Egyptian, flint animal forms are echoed not only by the theriomorphic 
greywacke and siltstone palettes that feature in funerary assemblages 


59 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 5.3. Flint “fishtail knife’, 
dating to the Predynastic period, 
from Hierakonpolis (Garstang 
Museum, University of Liverpool, 
E6560, h. 13cm). 


from late Naqada I onwards (see Stevenson 2009), but also by the 
theriomorphic and plant-form stone funerary vessels that began to be 
produced. 

There is a sense in which, from the perspective of Bronze Age 
Egyptians, traditional stone-working is culturally privileged. As a form 
of craftwork with such a long history, it is respected not for ingenuity or 
innovation but for its inherent conservatism. It seems likely, therefore, 
that ancient Egyptian pharaonic culture from the Early Bronze Age 
through to the Iron Age continued to incorporate some forms of stone- 
working technology for two quite differing reasons — some tools survive 
at the lower end of the socio-economic scale on the basis of cheapness and 
convenience of material (and perhaps also sterility, in the case of freshly 
knapped flint blades used for such medical purposes as circumcision — 
see Nunn 1996: 165), but another set of tools, such as the ripple-flaked 
blades or funerary vessels, continued to be manufactured because stone- 
working acquired deep associations with permanence and sacredness. In 


60 


5. Stone-working 


this context, certain aspects of stone-working survived technologically 
primarily because they ¬ and the materials themselves — were so 
inextricably associated with rituals stretching back for thousands of 
years. Stone-working moved from widespread use simply as a convenient 
and versatile material in the prehistoric period, to a new role as a symbol 
of permanence and sacredness in the pharaonic period. 

If the flint knapping, the carving of stone palettes and the making 
of stone vessels are all taken into account, there are good grounds for 
arguing that, across stone technology as a whole, a distinct pattern of 
production and consumption — from the Naqada II phase through to the 
Early Dynastic period (i.e. from the mid-4th millennium through to the 
early 3rd millennium BC) - can be perceived. This might be characterised 
in the following way: (1) standardisation, (2) élite specialisation, and (3) 
invention of tradition. Hikade (2004) has clearly demonstrated in the 
case of one type of stone tool (the ubiquitous scraper) that local flint- 
knappers throughout Egypt, during the Naqada II phase, produced a wide 
range of flint scrapers of different types, sizes, weights and functions, but 
that, with the onset of the protodynastic period and increasing political 
unification (Naqada IIII and Dynasty 0), a degree of mass production of 
certain types (e.g. triangular scrapers and bitruncated oval and rectangular 
blades) began to take place, but also more specialised production for 
élite patrons, using particular distinctive kinds of flint, in workshops 
associated with the nascent royal courts at Naqada, Hierakonpolis and 
Abydos. New, élite forms of blade, such as the ripple-flaked knives, were 
by this date being produced at these workshops and traded throughout 
Upper Egypt. 

In the Early Dynastic period these two long and overlapping phases 
of centralised control, imposing both degrees of standardisation and 
specialisation (Hikade 2004: 58), became the norm for stone-working, 
in the production of many different types of stone product. Stevenson 
(2009: 4), for example, makes the following observation about stone 
palette production towards the end of the Predynastic: ‘Palettes became 
progressively rarer towards the end of the Predynastic period, from 
Naqada IIIA2-B onwards, possibly because the source of the material 
used to make them had been appropriated by the elite and was exploited 
for other purposes, such as the production of bangles, stone vessels ... 
and, in particular, ceremonial palettes’. She also points out that the 


61 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


increasing simplicity of the standard palettes making up the majority of 
the examples from the protodynastic period, is in contrast to the growing 
elaboration of the élite ceremonial palettes and mace-heads (of which the 
early 1st-Dynasty Narmer Palette, Cairo JE32169, from Hierakonpolis, is 
the classic instance, see Shaw 2004: 1-7 and passim). This whole process 
of polarisation identified by Stevenson seems to exemplify a phenomenon 
characterised by Baines (1989: 476-7) as ‘aesthetic deprivation of the 
non-=elite’, which is essentially the flip-side of the process by which 
production of ceremonial greywacke palettes primarily in temple 
contexts, and vast quantities of stone vessels in funerary contexts, express 
and solidify the emerging symbolism of Egyptian kingship, and invention 
of associated traditions. Specialised stone-working was thus utilised as 
a driving force (and also one of the principal surviving expressions) of 
the major social and ideological transformations of the Early Dynastic 
period and Old Kingdom. In the areas of ceremonial stone artefacts and 
the emergence of stone masonry and sculpture, the accepted canonical 
view of Egyptian kingship necessarily involved a degree of invention of 
tradition. Kemp (2006: 111) describes the process by which official Elite 
use of stone mobiliary art — and later also monumental stone architecture 
- consolidated a particular view of the past and the cosmos: “When well 
established, a great tradition may have an influence that is felt throughout 
society. But to reach this stage it has to expand at the expense of other 
traditions. It has to colonize the minds of the nation. Whatever does not 


> ”ر 


succumb, becomes “folk culture”. 


Stone vessel making technology and its physical 
and social contexts 


The working of stone into vessels of various shapes and sizes was one of the 
earliest specialised forms of craftwork in ancient Egypt, and thus became 
firmly established as one of the most characteristic aspects of Egyptian 
technology from the early Predynastic period onwards. Ironically, it 
seems to have been at a relatively early stage (the Predynastic through 
to the Early Dynastic) that many of the most impressive hard-stone 
vessels were produced; by the late Old Kingdom fewer stone vessels were 
being made, and most of these were carved from the softer stones. The 
precocity of Egyptian craftworkers in this area of technology appears to 


62 


5. Stone-working 


El ©‏ جلا ا < 


E 
E 
E 


Fig. 5.4. Scene showing workers drilling out the interiors of stone vessels (and also a stone 
sculptor, on the right-hand side), on the west wall of room A in the 12th-Dynasty tomb of 
Pepyankh at Meir. 


be confirmed by the fact that the Egyptian term for ‘craftsman’ (hmwty) is 
written with a determinative sign in the form of a drill, and was therefore 
not only initially used only to refer to producers of stone vessels, but also 
implies that the concept of craftwork took stone vessel production as its 
blueprint (see Drenkhahn 1995: 338). 

If one aspect of Egyptian technology were to be characterised as 
‘conservative’ and ‘traditional’ then stone vessel-making would surely be 
it. The earliest stone vessels, dating to the Badarian period (<c. 4500- 
3800 BC) seem to have been created using some form of basic grinding 
stone, operated either by hand or in the form of a primitive type of drill. 
During the pharaonic period depictions of vessel-making workshops 
(see Fig. 5.4) suggest that the principal drilling implement changed at 
about the end of the Middle Kingdom, but in other respects the basic 
process remained very much the same from the late Predynastic onwards 
(see Stocks 2003a). 

In 1972, the discovery of a crescent-shaped tool by a French 
archaeological surveyor working in the southwest corner of the mortuary 
temple of Ramesses II (the Ramesseum) in western Thebes, led to 
Fernand Debono’s excavation of a 19th-Dynasty gypsum vessel-making 
workshop (Debono 1993-4). Extensive traces of stone vessel production 
processes have also survived at a number of Egyptian quarrying sites of 
many different dates. Some partially worked fragments and piles of debris 
have survived in situ at the Hatnub travertine quarries (Shaw 2010a: 27- 
30), but travertine workshops often seem to have been situated in urban 
areas rather than in the desert locations where the stone was extracted (e.g. 
a workshop in the Royal Adminstrative Building in the Heit el-Ghurab 
settlement on the Giza plateau, see Lehner et al. 2009: 61). This is in 


63 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


quite striking contrast to the situation at the Umm el-Sawwan alabaster 
gypsum quarries, in the northern Faiyum, surveyed and excavated in 
1928 by Gertrude Caton-Thompson. The quarries yielded numerous 
tools and partially drilled and fashioned vessels in working areas scattered 
across the region (Caton-Thompson and Gardner 1934). The tools at 
Umm el-Sawwan principally comprised crescent-shaped flint borers used 
to carve out the interiors of cylindrical alabaster gypsum vessels. This 
particular tool type was initially published by Jacques de Morgan in 1897 
(de Morgan 1897: 114) and John Garstang (1903), but it was at Umm 
el-Sawwan that flint borers were first found in large numbers. 

A number of insights into processes of hollowing out the interiors of 
stone vessels have been provided by ethno-archaeological and experimental 
studies (see Hester and Heizer 1981 for the former, and Stocks 2003a 
for the latter). The initial stages of soft stone vessel production, from 
the Predynastic period onwards, clearly consisted of a process by which 
the fragment of stone was roughly shaped and smoothed with stone 
tools (probably flint chisels, punches and scrapers). The next stage of 
the chaîne opératoire has been greatly illuminated by the experimental 
work undertaken by Denys Stocks, who took as the basis of his work 
such pictorial evidence as hieroglyphic symbols representing boring 
tools (Stocks 1993: fig. 3) and depictions of the use of the so-called 
twist-reverse-twist drill — labelled TRTD by Stocks — in various tombs, 
including that of Mereruka at Saqqara (6th Dynasty; Duell 1938), that 
of Pepyankh at Meir (12th Dynasty; Fig. 5.4), and those of Rekhmira at 
Thebes and Iby at Thebes (18th Dynasty and 26th Dynasty; see Stocks 
1986: fig. 1). On the basis of such depictions, Stocks succeeded in creating 
modern replicas of the figure-of-eight stone borer and the TRTD, thus 
producing an experimental limestone vessel. With a height of 10.7cm 
and a diameter of 10cm, the vessel took 22 hours and 35 minutes to 
make (including the exterior shaping, interior tubular drilling and stone 
boring). Stocks found that bow-driven tubes produced a tapering drill 
core, whereas the use of the TRTD resulted in a parallel-sided core, 
as in the case of an un-catalogued alabaster gypsum vase in the Petrie 
Museum. Although bow-driven tubes would have been five times faster 
than the TRTD, they would have provided insufficient leverage and 
control, and Stocks? experiments showed that the vessels could actually 
be broken by the additional mechanical stresses involved in using a bow. 


64 


5. Stone-working 


Different toolkits seem to have been required for the drilling of different 
rock types, thus travertine and alabaster gypsum, although very similar in 
appearance, are 3 and 2 respectively on the Mohs scale of hardness (4.5 
and 1.25 on the ‘absolute’ scale of hardness). Modern experimentation 
involving the attempted drilling of gypsum and travertine vessels with 
flint or chert crescent-shaped borers has demonstrated that such tools 
would not have been capable of drilling harder stones such as travertine, 
which are instead likely to have been hollowed out with a reed tubular 
drill in the earliest periods, and later with a copper tubular drill (Stocks 
2003a: 139-40). With travertine vessels, the brittleness of the stone 
would have presented an additional difficulty to the use of flint borers. 

Although great progress has been made in the understanding of the 
skills and tools used to produce stone vessels in the pharaonic period, far 
less is known about the social and economic framework within which the 
production of stone artefacts took place, from small cosmetic items up to 
colossal statuary. One means of beginning to understand this context is 
to identify and study workshops at settlements both in association with 
quarries and in the vicinity of the towns, temples and tombs that were 
the primary destinations of high quality worked stone. 


Where were stone-working ateliers located? 


Opinions differ as to the amount of stone-sculpting or vessel-making 
that took place at ancient Egyptian quarry sites (as opposed to such 
work taking place at royal and temple workshops/studios in cities such 
as Memphis or Thebes), and in practice it seems likely that in situ 
sculpting varied according to date, material and location, and perhaps 
through other factors too. The survival of debris from vessel-making, 
including occasional unfinished vessels, indicates that the quarry-workers 
transformed a certain amount of the travertine into vessels in situ at the 
Hatnub quarries (Shaw 2010a: 55-9, figs 2.2-3), but there is no real 
evidence of the creation of any large-scale objects, such as statues, at 
Hatnub. In addition, recent work by the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 
Mission to Deir el-Bersha has revealed a New Kingdom travertine vase- 
making workshop at the Maghara Abu Aziz travertine quarries, midway 
between Sheikh Said and northern Amarna (Harco Willems, personal 
communication). 


65 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


One type of evidence for the extent to which items were carved in 
advance of transportation takes the form of a number of surviving 
depictions of the movement of statues, the best-known being the scene 
in the early 12th-Dynasty tomb of Thuthotep at Deir el-Bersha, showing 
a colossal statue of the deceased being dragged along by lines of workers 
pulling on ropes (Newberry 1893: 17-26, pl. 15). The principal difficulty 
in interpreting such scenes, however, is the well-known problem that 
pharaonic-period artists often portrayed objects in their finished form 
even when, in reality, they were still incomplete — this is particularly 
evident from the many scenes in which objects are being manufactured 
in temple workshops. It is therefore uncertain as to whether Thuthotep’s 
travertine statue was actually completely carved at the Hatnub quarries, 
or simply shown in its finished state as an artistic convention. Badawy 
(1963) refers to the text accompanying the Thuthotep scene, and 
specifically the description of the statue as ist twt pn ifd, arguing that 
this implies that the statue was only a squared block until it reached 
Hermopolis Magna (or Deir el-Bersha). Bryan (1992: 138-9), however, 
argues that ‘statues were largely completed in or near quarries and ... 
shipped to distant sites’, pointing out, for instance, that there were ‘chief 
sculptors among Ramesside quarry expedition personnel and also that 
‘calcitic works are homogeneous as a stylistic group and were very likely 
sculpted in or near the quarries’. The archaeological evidence for some 
quarry-site carving of hard-stone items is reasonably widespread, with 
the survival of near-complete colossal statues in the southern granite 
quarries on the east bank at Aswan, an inscribed obelisk of Seti I at the 
Gebel Gulab quartzite quarries (Habachi 1960; see Fig. 5.5), and a statue 
of an unknown 25th-Dynasty king in the Tumbos granite gneiss quarry 
(Dunham 1947). 

On the other hand, evidence does exist for the large-scale working 
of stone at the point of use, as opposed to the quarries. Saleh (1974) 
excavated a set of apparent workshops southeast of Menkaura’s pyramid 
at Giza, consisting of a large open courtyard and several small house- 
like buildings (Saleh 1974). A large collection of fragments of travertine 
(including an unfinished column base) was found in the courtyard, and 
it seems likely that these were being carved and polished for use in the 
nearby pyramid complex of Khafra, particularly in the Valley Temple. 
Rainer Stadelmann (1981: 67) has suggested that the structures excavated 


66 


5. Stone-working 


SS 


e 
: کر‎ 2 
a ا‎ 


2 يټ‎ e 


Fig. 5.5. The inscribed tip of an unfinished obelisk of Seti I at the Gebel Gulab quartzite 
quarries. 


by Saleh may perhaps correspond to the so-called bmuwt-smit, ‘desert 
workshop’, which is mentioned in workmen’s graffiti on the granite wall- 
blocks of Khafra’s Valley Temple (Reisner 1931: 277). 

A workshop for granite vessels has also been excavated on the island 
of Elephantine in the eastern part of the Old Kingdom town (Kaiser et 
al. 1999: 71-81), providing evidence for the techniques used to produce 
large numbers of vessels from the local granite in the 3rd and 4th 
dynasties. This workshop suggests that funerary stone vessel-making 
may have been extensively undertaken at provincial towns, close to the 
actual quarries, rather than being focussed primarily on workshops near 
the Memphite necropolis, like the Menkaura one described above (see 


67 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Arnold and Pischikova 1999: 129, n. 23). The fact that the Elephantine 
granite vessel workshop included numerous individual courtyards and 
working areas, and covered an area of up to 600m, suggests that it was 
operating at a scale considerably higher than household production. 

The overall picture of state-organised stone vessel and sculpture 
production seems to involve workshops based at a number of different 
types of location, perhaps largely dependent on the type of stone being 
worked, and the nature, function and manoeuvrability ofthe end products. 
The archaeological data discussed above can of course be contextualised 
to some degree by textual and visual evidence. Eyre (1987) has provided 
a detailed study of the principal sources of textual evidence for the 
organisation of labour in the Old and New Kingdoms, which includes a 
great deal of data relating to quarrying and building (particularly covering 
such questions as the composition, management and remuneration of 
the workforce involved in procuring, transporting and working stone, as 
well as the timing of quarrying and construction projects). This leads 
on logically to the consideration of the major logistical factors, in terms 
of technology and labour management, and resource procurement, that 
would have been involved in the construction of the Old Kingdom royal 
pyramid complexes and sun temples. 


Stone masonry as the monumentalisation of ideology 


When royal funerary monuments began to be built in stone rather 
than mud brick, in the early 3rd millennium BC, the transition was as 
much ideological as technological. Whereas late Predynastic and Early 
Dynastic temples and tombs were largely constructed from mud brick, 
from around the time of the late 2nd Dynasty onwards it is clear that 
stone began to be regarded as the primary material for divine or funerary 
constructions, in contrast to the more ephemeral medium of soil/mud. 
There are some parallels here with the primacy ascribed to stone vessels 
as opposed to pottery, which was already deeply entrenched in Egyptian 
thought, long before the change to stone architecture. As Kemp (2006: 
144) points out, however, stone masonry also evolved to some extent 
out of another ephemeral method of construction — that using wooden 
frames, wooden panels and sheets of matting. In fact, it is arguable that 
the latter exerted an influence on stone architecture that was stronger and 


68 


5. Stone-working 


more lasting than that of mud-brick structures. Mud bricks had been 
used frequently for tombs and funerary chapels from the late Predynastic 
to the 3rd Dynasty, whereas wood and reeds seem to have been typically 
employed for religious buildings, and particularly shrines. 


Old Kingdom royal funerary architecture as the pinnacle of 
stone-working technology 


Since at least the time of the ancient Greeks there has been considerable 
debate concerning the means used by the Egyptians to construct the 
Great Pyramid. However, since very few Egyptian textual records 
referring to their engineering and architectural methods have survived, 
experimental archaeology has often turned out to be the principal means 
of proof for many recent theories. There are still numerous unanswered 
questions concerning the quarrying, dressing and transportation of the 
stone blocks, let alone the processes of precisely levelling the base and 
aligning the sides. 

Between 1880 and 1882, Petrie undertook several seasons of careful 
survey work on the Giza plateau, site of the pyramid complexes of the 
4th-Dynasty rulers Khufu, Khafra and Menkaura (Petrie 1883). The 
results of this work suggested to him that the Egyptians had levelled 
the area intended for the Great Pyramid and its successors by cutting a 
grid of shallow trenches into the bedrock, and flooding them with water, 
then reducing the intervening ‘islands’ of stone to the necessary height. 
For most of the 20th century there was surprisingly little archaeological 
work concerned with the pyramids at Giza, but in the 1980s Mark Lehner 
began to produce a meticulous new map of the plateau, incorporating the 
various holes and trenches cut into the rock around the pyramids (Lehner 
1985a, 1985b). On the basis of this mapping project, Lehner argued that 
the Egyptians had in fact not levelled the whole area intended for the 
pyramids, but simply ensured that narrow perimeter strips around the 
edges of each pyramid were as perfectly horizontal as possible. 

Egyptian architects, surveyors and builders used two specialised 
surveying tools, the mrþt (instrument of knowing’) and the by (a sighting 
tool probably made from the central rib of a palm leaf), to allow them to 
lay out straight lines and right angles as well as orienting the sides of and 
corners of structures in accordance with astronomical alignments. It is 


69 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 5.6. Granite door-jamb from Hierakonpolis, dating to the reign of the 2nd-Dynasty king 
Khasekhemwy (Egyptian Museum, Cairo, JE33896, 155 x 120 x 60cm). 

clear that the Egyptians were already utilising astronomical knowledge to 
assist their architectural projects from the very beginning of the pharaonic 
period, since the ceremony of pd šs (‘stretching the cord’) is first attested 
on a granite block of the reign of the 2nd-Dynasty king Khasekhemwy 
(Cairo JE 33896, c. 2650 BC, see Fig. 5.6). In later periods, the process 
of ‘stretching the cord’ continued to be depicted in the texts and reliefs 
of temples such as that of Horus at Edfu, but it gradually appears to 
have become more of a ritual than a practical technique, since these later 
temples were aligned much less precisely, often simply with reference to 
the direction of the river. 

But how did this astronomically-based surveying actually work in 
practice? Edwards (1993: 247-51) suggested that true north was probably 
found by measuring the place where a particular star rose and fell in 
the west and east, then bisecting the angle between these two points. 
More recently, Spence (2000) argues that the architects of the Great 


70 


5. Stone-working 


Pyramid sighted on two stars rotating around the position of the north 
pole (Kochab and Mizar) which would have been in perfect alignment at 
around 2467 BC, the date when Khufu’s pyramid is thought to have been 
constructed. This hypothesis is bolstered by the fact that inaccuracies in 
the orientations of earlier and later pyramids can be closely correlated 
with the degree to which the alignment of the two aforementioned stars 
deviates from true north. Rawlins and Pickering (2001), however, point 
out an error relating to “inter-star line drift’ which leads them to suggest 
a different pair of circumpolar stars: Thuban and Draconis. Whatever 
the intricacies of the arguments, there seem to be good grounds for 
assuming that the practical logistics of pyramid construction in the 
Old Kingdom were accompanied by astronomical observations that not 
only assisted the architectural work but also demonstrated an equally 
highly developed level of achievement in astronomy; as Rawlins and 
Pickering put it: “Thuban passed within 0.1 degrees of the pole in 2800 
BC, a chance event that may have stimulated the historical flowering 
of celestially based surveying, which was unquestionably used for the 
pyramids built soon after that at Giza’. 


What were the basic engineering techniques underlying the 
construction of Old Kingdom pyramid complexes? 


Most archaeologists agree that some kind of system of ramps must 
have been used in order to drag the millions of stone blocks into their 
positions in Old Kingdom pyramid complexes and other monumental 
constructions (e.g. Edwards 1993: 261-6, Arnold 1991: 79-108). No 
such ramps have actually survived at the Great Pyramid itself (although 
small, quasi-embankments made of rocks and tafla clay may have been 
used for the preliminary raising of stone blocks at ground level, see 
Lehner 1997: 217), but enough traces have survived around some of the 
other Old Kingdom pyramids (and at other, much later monuments, 
such as the first Pylon of the Karnak temple, see Fig. 5.7) to suggest 
that at least five different systems might have been used. The most 
straightforward method would have been the so-called linear ramp, 
which was perhaps used in the 3rd-Dynasty pyramid of Sekhemkhet 
at Saqqara (Goneim 1957). Such ramps, however, were probably rarely 
used because they would have had to be very wide. An alternative would 


71 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 5.7. The remains of 
a mud-brick construction 
ramp against the inner 
face of the first pylon of 
the Temple of Amun at 
Karnak. 


have been the ‘staircase ramp’, a steep and narrow set of steps leading up 
one face of the pyramid, traces of which have been found at the Sinki, 
Meidum, Giza, Abu Ghurob and Lisht pyramids (see Dreyer and Swelim 
1982 for evidence of ramps at the small Sinki 3rd-Dynasty pyramid). 
The construction of a 400m-long and 30m-high ‘spiral ramp’ is perhaps 
described in a 19th-Dynasty ‘satirical letter’ (Papyrus Anastasi I, British 
Museum EA10247), although the translator, Gardiner (1911: 16-17), 
makes the point that this is a very complex text: ‘the technicalities of 


72 


5. Stone-working 


these passages are such that the modern Egyptologist is placed in a far 
worse quandary than this ancient scribe; so far from being able to supply 
the answers, he is barely able to understand the questions’. The principal 
objection to the spiral ramp, in the form suggested by Wheeler (1935) 
and Dunham (1965), is the question of what it would have rested on and 
how corrective calculations and checks could have been made from the 
corners if most of the pyramid was continually covered up (see Arnold 
1991: 100). 

The ‘reversing ramp’, a zigzag course up one face of a pyramid, would 
probably have been most effective for the construction of step pyramids, 
although, frustratingly, there are no signs of its use on the step pyramids 
at Saqqara, Sinki and Meidum. ‘Traces of “interior ramps’ have survived 
inside the remains of the 5Sth-Dynasty pyramids of Sahura, Nyuserra 
and Neferirkara at Abusir and of Pepi II at Saqqara, but some kind of 
exterior ramp would still have been needed after the interior was filled 
in (although see Brier and Houdin 2008 for the theory that an interior 
ramp alone was sufficient). It has been suggested that the terraced nature 
of the pyramid core would often have made it more convenient to use a 
series of much smaller ramps built along the sides of the pyramid from 
step to step (e.g. Edwards 2003); the remains of these would no doubt 
have been lost when the outer casing was applied. It is also possible 
that the causeway connecting the pyramid/mortuary temple to the valley 
temple might originally have served as builders ramp from quay to 
construction site (the quay being connected with the Nile by canal). 

Apart from the question of the types of ramps that were employed, 
debate has also tended to centre on the methods by which individual 
stone blocks were raised into position. Since the Egyptians made no use 
of block and tackle methods or cranes, it is usually assumed that wooden 
and bronze levers were used to manoeuvre the blocks into position. Stocks 
(2003b) has discussed the engineering issues relating to such factors as 
friction and angle of slope, with regard to dragging blocks up ramps 
on sledges, while Parry (2004) has undertaken experimental work and 
analysis to explore the possibility that sets of four full-size versions of 
the model wooden ‘rockers’ frequently known from foundation deposits 
(e.g. Naville 1908: pl. 168, Hayes 1959: 85-6, fig. 47) (see Fig. 5.8), 
might have been fitted around stone blocks to allow them to be rolled up 
ramps. Such rockers are conventionally assumed, as the name indicates, 


73 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 5.8. Three wooden 
model ‘rockers’ from 

a foundation deposit 

of the temple of 
Hatshepsut at Deir 
el-Bahri (Museo 
Archeologico, Florence, 
2325-7. 


to have simply been used to allow stone blocks to be manoeuvred more 
easily (see Petrie 1917: 41), or perhaps to physically rock casing blocks 
into place in monuments (e.g. Fitchen 1978: 3-9), although, as Arnold 
(1991: 272) points out, The fall of a loaded rocker would have wiped out 
all working teams below ... One might suggest, therefore, that rockers 
could have been used only on particularly wide and specially equipped 
steps — that is, on a staircase that was never provided by the pyramid 
itself, but only by masonry added at a lesser angle from outside the 
pyramid slope. 

As far as the internal chambers of the Great Pyramid were concerned, 
the level of structural engineering was equally high; indeed the roof of 
the so-called Grand Gallery was the Egyptians’ earliest attempt at corbel- 
vaulting on a colossal scale. The architects surmounted particularly 
difficult logistics in the creation of the corridor leading up to the main 
burial chamber of the Great Pyramid (the so-called King’s Chamber). 
The corridors in other pyramids are all either level or sloping downwards, 
whereas this one slopes steeply upwards, which would have presented 
particular problems when it came to blocking the passage with heavy 
granite plugs, after the king's body had been placed in the chamber. It 
is clear from the fact that the plugs in this ‘ascending corridor’ are an 
inch wider than the entrance that the plugs must have been lowered into 
position not from the outside, as was usually the case, but from a storage 
position within the pyramid itself (perhaps in the Grand Gallery). It is 
also clear that the design had to allow the workmen who pushed the 
plugs into position to be able to escape down a shaft leading from the 
Grand Gallery down to the ‘descending corridor’, through which they 


could then exit. 


74 


5. Stone-working 


Discussion 


When Scarre (1994: 77) argues that the Egyptian pyramid complex 
‘does not represent a house or building, but an abstract concept’, he is 
primarily concerned with the use of Egyptian architectural symbolism as 
a possible way of gaining insights into prehistoric European monumental 
architecture. Almost inadvertently, however, he highlights perhaps the 
most crucial aspect of ancient Egyptian monumental architecture — the 
fact that, like many other ancient ritual monuments, it represents a 
highly distinctive meeting point of engineering expertise and ideology. 
In John Romer’s monograph on the nature and construction of the 
Great Pyramid at Giza, he suggests that ‘the physical process of making 
this Great Pyramid was in itself a kind of thinking (Romer 2007: 150). 
There are fruitful areas to explore at the interface between the Egyptian 
belief system and the emergence of distinctive forms of architecture, 
given the extent to which these two areas of ancient Egyptian culture 
shape one another. 

As already noted above, in the last section of the discussion of the 
science and technology of healing in Chapter 4, the Egyptians seem 
to have developed new methods of construction engineering while 
striving to maintain the illusion that the thinking behind pyramids 
was deeply traditional and rooted in the past. Thus Kemp (2006: 158) 
points out that ‘religious architecture well illustrates the Egyptian genius 
for clothing change in traditional costume’. A text at Edfu suggests 
that the architecture of the temple of Horus derived ultimately from 
the work of Imhotep, the 3rd-Dynasty official associated with the 
construction of Djoser’s step pyramid (Sethe 1902: 15-18), despite the 
gap of several thousand years, and the very different characteristics of 
the stone structures involved. This deliberate invoking of the past may 
have been intended to demonstrate the authenticity of the Edfu temple 
architecture by rooting it in a much earlier era, but it perhaps also sought 
to stress a degree of continuity in Egyptian architectural elements, styles 
and proportions. Architects and engineers were allowed to innovate, 
but their innovations, like those of artists and poets, were embedded 
strictly within the elaborate system of decorum that had been laid down 
in the Early Dynastic period, when the officially approved ‘traditions’ of 


75 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


newly unified state and its royal court were established through careful 
selection of élite materials, techniques and products. Baines (2007: 17), 
discussing the nature and effects of ancient Egyptian decorum, suggests 
that visual and written aspects of Egyptian culture ‘changed slowly, in 
phases of significant reformulation rather than progressively’ — this seems 
to have been the case with Egyptian stone-built monuments, which were 
fundamentally cosmological in form and purpose. 


76 


Mummifıcation and glass-working;: 
issues of definition and process 


T'he reasons for artificial mummification, and the date when it was 
first introduced in Egypt, cannot yet be confirmed (Rosalie David 
2008: 12). 


The question of the establishment of either glassmaking or regular 
glassworking is a vexed one, and there has been a general consensus 
that glass comes to Egypt as a developed craft (Paul T. Nicholson 
2007: 3). 


Defining and dissecting technologies 


The artificial preservation of human and animal bodies and the 
production of glass are not, at first glance, connected to any great degree 
(although, technically speaking, both made some use of ‘natron’ as a raw 
material). They are however closely linked by certain issues encountered 
in reconstructing their emergence as technologies within Egyptian 
culture. The origins and nature of Egyptian mummification and glass- 
working can only be properly understood if they are first clearly defined 
in terms of the processes and materials involved. 

One frequent reason for unresolved debates about the timing of the 
first appearance of particular technologies in the Nile valley is the lack of 
a rigorous agreed characterisation of the craft or products in question. 
This is very much the case with mummification, which can of course be 
simply defined as the artificial preservation of human or animal tissues, 
but in reality requires more subtle definition, particularly if the specific 
cultural and environmental contexts of Egyptian mummification are 
to be taken into account. Discussing international analysis of human 


77 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


mummified material in general, Aufderheide (2003: xiii) points out that 
‘the absence of consensus for a theoretical basis and mission tends to 
limit the coherence and directionality of its activities”, and he admits that 
his own definition of a mummy (a corpse with soft tissues sufficiently 
preserved to resemble a once-living person” is not scientifically ideal. 

To some extent, the situation in Egypt (and elsewhere) is complicated 
by the fact that the climate and environment are highly conducive to 
‘natural/spontaneous mummification’ (whereby burial in sand, in a hot, 
dry climate, has the effect of arresting decomposition and desiccating 
the body), as opposed to ‘artificial or ‘anthropogenic mummification 
involving application of a variety of materials in order both to prevent 
the corpse from decomposing and to enable it to retain some kind of life- 
like appearance. The desiccating effects of Egypt's deserts have ensured 
that, from the Palaeolithic onwards, human bodies have frequently 
been transformed into ‘natura’ mummies, through burial in the sand 
(see, for example, Wendorf 1968 for Palaeolithic examples). Examples 
of the naturally mummified type of corpse were excavated by Petrie at 
the Naqada and Ballas mid- to late Predynastic cemeteries (Petrie and 
Quibell 1896, Baumgartel 1970), where over three thousand burials had 
been made, usually with the body lying on its side in a flexed position. 
In a bioarchaeological analysis of the bodies from another Predynastic 
cemetery at Naga ed-Dêr, Podzorski points out that ‘the state of 
preservation of the human remains was so good that skin and hair were 
often found completely intact’ (Podzorski 1990: 85). 

As far as artificial mummification is concerned, Mokhtar et al. (1973) 
have outlined a set of thirteen criteria that they regard as the essential 
components of fully developed Egyptian mummification in the New 
Kingdom: 


. putting the corpse on the operating table 

. extraction of the brain 

. extraction of the viscera 

. sterilisation of the body cavities and viscera 

. embalming the viscera 

. temporary stuffing of the thoracic and abdominal cavities 
. dehydration of the body 


. removal of the temporary stuffing material 


78 


سر پا پنں کم ى O°‏ ل( 00 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


9. packing the body cavities with permanent stuffing material 
10. annointing the body 
11. packing the face openings 
12. smearing the skin with molten resin 
13. adorning and bandaging the mummy 


There are a number of reasons why the above list, however 
comprehensive it may seem, does not adequately define the full process 
of mummification as practised in Egypt. The first crucial point to be 
made is that such procedures as desiccation and embalming are only 
parts of mummification — the rest of the process belongs not so much 
to technology as to ritual, as modern observers would see it, although 
of course to ancient Egyptians the magical, ritualistic aspects of 
mummification would have presumably been considered to be integral 
elements of the technology. It is perhaps no accident that the only 
surviving ancient Egyptian text to provide any details on the process of 
mummification — the so-called ‘Ritual of embalming’, preserved in the 
form of two Theban hieratic papyri dating to the early 1st century AD 
(P. Boulaq III and P Louvre 5.158; Goyon 1972, Sternberg-el-Hotabi 
1988) — consists primarily of description of rituals rather than physical 
treatment of the corpse; it deals first with ceremonies to be performed on 
the mummy, secondly prayers and incantations to be recited, and thirdly 
methods of covering the body in linen wrappings and embrocations. 
In other words, it omits any discussion of such crucial procedures as 
desiccation and evisceration. 

T'he second major problem with the itemised description provided by 
Mokhtar et al. is that it is based only on what had actually emerged and 
developed by the New Kingdom. It does not therefore take into account 
any of the blind alleys down which the technology strayed on several 
occasions on the road from the early Predynastic to the 21st Dynasty. 
Table 6.1 therefore takes a different approach — instead of dissecting the 
nature of fully developed mummification in the New Kingdom, it looks 
at the various stages the technology appears to have passed through, 
several of which were never incorporated into the final accepted definition 
of the process. 

The practice of Egyptian mummification seems to have evolved 
initially simply to preserve the image of the body — thus some of the 


79 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Predynastic Wrapping - bandages wrapped around whole or part of body 
Soaking of bandaging/body in resinous substances 
Use of linen bandaging/plugs to pad and mould the corpse 


Dismemberment 
Early Dynastic Use of natron/salt as preservative 

Soaking of bandages in stucco to create life-like appearance 
Old Kingdom Evisceration 


First Intermediate Period Funerary mask 
Inclusion of amulets in wrappings 


Middle Kingdom Removal of brain 
20th Dynasty Artificial eyes 
21st Dynasty Refinement of subcutaneous packing 


Table 6.1. Possible stages in the development of Egyptian mummification. 


early mummies of the 3rd millennium BC were painted or soaked with 
plaster, paint and/or resin, preserving the outer shell of the body but 
allowing the rest to decay away inside. Two good examples of the latter 
are (1) the Sth-Dynasty body of Ranefer, excavated by Petrie (1892: 15- 
17) in Tomb 9 at Meidum, which was encased in resin-soaked wrappings 
sculpted over the forms of the face and other anatomical features (Fig. 
6.1), and (2) the 5th-Dynasty body of Waty (or perhaps Nefer) found 
swathed in plaster-impregnated linen strips, inside a wooden coffin in 
the tomb of Nefer and Ka-hay at Saqqara (Moussa and Altenmüller 
1971, and see Rice 1990: pl. IX for an excellent colour image), and thus 
preserving the outer appearance extremely realistically. 

The development of more sophisticated techniques meant that 
gradually more of the original body was retained, eventually reaching 
something of a peak in the late New Kingdom and Third Intermediate 
Period (c. 1200-900 BC). However, by the mid-5th century BC, when 
Herodotus wrote his detailed description of the process of mummification 
(Histories vol. 2, 86-8, see de Selincourt 1954), techniques are thought to 
have gone into decline, presumably partly in order to meet the demands 
of ‘mass production’ as mummification spread through larger numbers 
of the population. 

Until the 1990s it was generally thought that the first artificial 
Egyptian mummies were those found at Early Dynastic cemeteries 
such as Abydos, Saqqara and Tarkhan, but in 1997 one of the non- 
élite Predynastic cemeteries at Hierakonpolis (HK43) yielded three 
intact burials containing female bodies with their heads, necks and 


80 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


Fig. 6.1. Head of the Sth- 
Dynasty body of Ranefer, 
encased in resin-soaked linen 
wrappings. This body was 
excavated by Petrie from 
Tomb 9 at Meidum, and the 
head was brought back to 
London, but later destroyed 
when the Royal College of 
Surgeons was bombed in 
World War I1. 


a 


a . perr agp YF 2 
hands wrapped in linen bandages, the whole of each of the corpses being 
swathed in linen and matting (Friedman et al. 1999; 2002; Figueiredo 
2004: 18-19). The grave goods accompanying these bodies dated to 
around 3600 BC (the early Naqada II culture), therefore pushing back 
the earliest use of artificial mummification to a much earlier period 
than previously supposed, although opinions differ as to whether the 
simple bandaging of parts of a corpse can necessarily be described as 
mummification. Intriguingly, one of the women had her throat cut 
after death, suggesting that even at this date there might have been 
a sense in which the ritual dismemberment and reassembly of Osiris’ 
body-parts was being acted out. This evidence raises the possibility that 
among the earlier versions of mummification was a set of procedures 
connected with dismemberment and reassembly of the body. Herodotus’ 
very detailed account of Egyptian mummification describes the main 
practitioners as paraschistai (‘slitters”) and taricheutai (‘picklers”), and, 
although the terms are somewhat irreverent, they convey well the two 
principal stages: the body must first be cut up and to some extent 


81 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


dismembered by the slitters before it can be reassembled and preserved 
by the picklers. The Osiris myth is therefore a very accurate prototype 
for the practical process of physical preservation, but some of the 
evidence seems to suggest that the dismemberment theme initially 
dominated the process, only later being subordinated to the idea of 
physically preserving the body. 

Further work by Jana Jones (2002) indicates that some form of 
artificial treatment of the body was even taking place much earlier in 
the 4th millennium, in the Badarian period (c. 4500-4100 BC). Jones’ 
examination of thick, desiccated clumps of wrappings from the Neolithic 
cemeteries at Badari and Mostagedda has shown that resin-soaked 
bandages were already being applied to bodies in a similar way to the 
Hierakonpolis examples mentioned above (Jones 2002: 7); this suggests a 
period of at least a thousand years of experimentation in mummification 
before the 1st Dynasty, although, as Jones points out, Whether the act 
of wrapping the body in the very earliest periods indicates an intention 
to preserve it artificially, or whether it was another aspect of the funerary 
ritual, is uncertain.” 


Issues of innovation and archaeological attestation: 
mummification as case-study 


Each of the stages in Table 6.1 is of course just the earliest archaeological 
attestation of any specific innovation. There is no reason, for instance, 
why evisceration should not have occurred earlier than the 4th Dynasty 
but is from this date that the first relevant evidence survives: a travertine 
chest divided into four compartments (Reisner 1928: 80-1), which was 
excavated at Giza from the tomb of Hetepheres I, the mother of the 4th- 
Dynasty ruler Khufu, c. 2589-2566 BC (or perhaps from her re-burial 
cache, since her sarcophagus was found empty). Each compartment was 
found to contain a flat linen package with traces of organic material, 
and in three cases also traces of a 3% solution of natron, leading Alfred 
Lucas (1932) to argue that this was essentially a ‘canopic’ chest, and 
therefore evidence of the first known case of evisceration (see Dodson 
1994 for detailed discussion of canopic equipment in relation to 
evisceration). Other types of evidence, however, may hint at less tangible 
evidence for evisceration at an earlier date. It has been suggested that 


82 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


the mastaba-style ‘south tomb’, forming part of 3rd-Dynasty royal 
funerary complexes, might have been intended to hold the viscera (on 
the basis that the room identified as the burial chamber is too small to 
hold an entire human corpse, see Edwards 1993: 50), but most scholars 
regard this as unlikely. A more reliable indication of the emergence 
of the practice of evisceration and separate preservation of the viscera 
occurs in the mastaba-tombs of high officials at Meidum in the reign of 
Sneferu (2613-2589 BC) at the beginning of the 4th Dynasty (i.e. either 
earlier than or roughly contemporary with Hetepheres I), some of which 
include niches located high in the wall, in positions which are similar 
to later canopic installations (see Petrie et al. 1912), and in the case of 
the Šth-Dynasty Tomb 9 at Meidum, belonging to the above-mentioned 
Ranefer, packages of viscera were found in such a niche, and described by 
Petrie (1892: 18) as follows: ‘In the recess in the south end ..., there were 
parts of the internal organs embalmed, forming lumps of resined matter 
wrapped round in linen, and fragments of such were in Rahotep’s recess 
... There was no sign of these organs having been in jars or enclosures; 
and it seems as if these recesses in the tombs were intended to lay the 
internal parts on after embalming, before the use of jars for such was 
introduced. 

The same can be demonstrated for the so-called ‘opening of the 
mouth’ ritual. Certain aspects of this ritual have survived both in the 
textual and archaeological records. One of the most important objects 
used in the ritual of the ‘opening of the mouth’ (designed to instil life 
into mummies and funerary statues, see Roth 1992, 1993) was the ps¥-kf; 
probably originally a pressure-flaked flint knife with a bifurcated blade 
shaped like a fish tail (sometimes described as a fishtail lance-head, see 
Needler 1956 and van Walsem 1978-9; see also Chapter 5 and Fig. 5.3 
above), many finely crafted examples of which have been excavated from 
Predynastic graves as early as the Naqada I period (c. 4000-3500 BOC), 
thus probably indicating that a similar ceremony was already being used 
well before the first evidence for many other aspects of Egyptian funerary 
ritual (although it has also been argued that the blade may have been 
used to cut the umbilical cord at child-birth, see Roth 1992 and Harer 
1994). Other implements relating to the ‘opening of the mouth’ process 
are described as ntrwy-blades (models of which have survived) and were 
principally made from meteoric iron, although occasionally other metals 


83 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


were used. The nmst-vessel was used for a form of ritual lustration, also 
in association with the opening of the mouth procedure. The so-called 
‘seven sacred oils’ were used for anointing the deceased in the opening of 
the mouth ceremony (see Serpico and White 2000: 419, 461-2); some of 
the oils are known from 1st-Dynasty wooden and ivory funerary labels, 
but the group appears not to have been used collectively until the Old 
Kingdom (2686-2181 BC), when they were represented as part of the 
offering formula on the walls or false-door stelae of tombs. The earliest 
known actual set of the seven sacred oils is from the above-mentioned 
tomb/re-burial cache of Queen Hetepheres I at Giza. However, small 
stone tablets with depressions for these oils were sometimes placed 
in burials throughout the Old Kingdom. Examples of all of these 
items associated with the ritualistic aspects of mummification have 
survived in the archaeological record, and in the case of the ps¥-kf, the 
possible derivation from the fishtail knife suggests that at least some 
of these posthumous rituals can be traced back to a date prior to the 
emergence of most of the other elements of fully developed Egyptian 
mummification. 


Glass-working or glass production? 


By the time that the first glass artefacts appear in the archaeological 
record in Egypt, in the early 18th Dynasty, mummification — one of the 
quintessential technologies of the Nile valley - had already gone through 
most of the major stages of its development. Egyptian glass-working, 
in contrast, has very much the feel of a new technology introduced 
from the outside, like the chariot or the composite bow. A number of 
early scholars (e.g. Lucas 1926: 38-40) assumed that glass was actually 
produced in Egypt, using raw materials, from at least the Amarna period 
onwards, but more recently there has been considerable debate as to 
whether the production technology could have emerged locally at this 
date, as opposed to the importing of foreign ingots and/or foreign glass- 
workers. Newton (1980: 176), for instance, argues that ‘the Egyptians 
could only melt other people’s glass even though they could fabricate the 
most exquisite items from it ... the Egyptian court depended for their 
basic raw material, or for an essential ingredient thereof, on imports 
from Asia’. 


84 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


In the case of early Egyptian glass-working, the definitional issues do 
not particularly focus on the nature and constituents of the product, since 
there is considerable agreement on what constitutes Bronze Age glass, 
e.g. Henderson (2000: 116): ‘the working properties of the molten glass 
governed the composition of ancient glass which all during Antiquity 
remained a soda-lime glass ... with some 60% of silica, some 5% of 
lime, much alkali and several percents of impurities due to the natural 
ingredients used’. Henderson’s general characterisation is fairly close to 
the definition of Egyptian glass in the Late Bronze Age, e.g. Nicholson 
(2007: 102): ‘the general composition of Egyptian glasses is consistently 
based upon a soda-lime glass with minor concentrations of potash and 
magnesia’. Thus, although there are some disputes as to the precise 
nature of the “minor concentrations’ mentioned by Nicholson, the major 
issues in ancient Egyptian glass-working instead centre on the definition 
of production processes, and when it is that Egyptians can be said to be 
producing glass from the basic raw materials, as opposed to melting and 
re-working imported cullet or ingots of glass. 

There had already been a long history of production of two other 
important vitreous products in Egypt — faience and frit (for clear 
definitions of which, see Nicholson 1993: 9-17). The best-known form 
of frit is the so-called ‘Egyptian blue’ material, which, according to 
Nicholson (1993: 16): ‘appears to be an Egyptian invention and, though 
of much greater antiquity, is closely allied to glass’. This clear evidence 
for Egyptians long history of producing these two other forms of 
vitreous product, makes it more likely either that they developed early 
glass roughly simultaneously with other Late Bronze Age cultures in 
the Near East, such as the kingdom of Mitanni, or that, at the very 
least, they were capable of quickly assimilating and adapting to this new 
technology, on the basis that they had been producing similar substances 
since the Predynastic period. 


Early glass in Egypt: the fundamentals 


The basic facts can be broken down into the following types of evidence: 
the surviving artefacts, the archaeology of urban glass-working, the 
textual evidence, and the chemical analysis of glass artefacts. 


85 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Artefacts and archaeology 


The archaeological picture consists of two basic elements: examples of 
glass artefacts and examples of sites where glass may have been either 
made or re-worked. The earliest surviving glass artefacts from Egypt date 
from the early 18th Dynasty onwards (c. 1500 BC), initially appearing 
as exotic products primarily in élite funerary assemblages, such as the 
tomb of Thutmose I (see Roehrig 2005: 67) and the tomb of the foreign 
wives of Thutmose III in Wadi Qubbanet el-Qirud at Thebes, c. 1460 
BC (and see Nicholson 2006 for discussion of the small group of known 
early 18th-Dynasty glass vessels; see also Fig. 1.7 above). Because these 
earliest examples of glass in Egypt already seem to be very technically 
accomplished, it has tended to be assumed that the technology must have 
been introduced from outside rather than being the result of a long-term 
evolution of technology (since, if the latter were true, we might expect to 
see more of a continuum of earlier examples of glass, gradually becoming 
more sophisticated and complex over time). 

A small group of New Kingdom archaeological sites (Amarna, Qantir 
and perhaps Malkata and Gurob) incorporate the remains of areas of 
production and debris relating to glass-working and/or glass-making. 
The possible glass-working/making areas at Malkata and Gurob were 
excavated in the early 20th century, but lack of proper records or 
publication means that little can be said about this evidence at present 
(although see Hodgkinson 2010: 74-7 and Shaw 2011, for new work 
on the pyrotechnological area of the settlement at Gurob). At Amarna, 
however, the early discoveries of Petrie (1894: 15-16, 25) have been 
greatly enlarged by the excavations conducted by Paul Nicholson (2007), 


Frcltin 9 Pans, 
SsSupporlid mn Che 
furnace On jars 
AE e e 
which the glaze FUNS. 


N.M.F.RP 


Fig. 6.2. Petrie’s line drawing depicting his interpretation of distinctive cylindrical clay vessels 
as fritting pans’ used in the initial stage of glass production; Nicholson et al. 1997, however, 
have reinterpreted these ‘pans’ as glass ingot moulds. 


86 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


focusing on site 045.1, where the presence of kilns, glass ingot moulds 
(see Fig. 6.2), and traces of fritted glass suggest that glass may have been 
produced from raw materials, and was probably also worked both here and 
in other parts of the city. At the Ramessid settlement of Qantir (ancient 
Piramesse), Edgar Pusch’s excavations have revealed melting crucibles 
and frits, specifically connected with red glass, but not yet any kilns or 
signs of glass-working (Rehren et al. 2001, Pusch and Rehren 2007). 
According to Rehren et al. (2001: 235), ‘the ... discovery of a complete 
crucible still filled with a powdery white calcium silicate material, 
probably badly corroded primary glass’ is an indication that Qantir was 
the site of primary Egyptian glass production from raw materials in the 
Ramessid period (i.e. c. 1300-1000 BC). 

Two further archaeological contexts that relate to glass-working in 
Egypt and elsewhere during the Late Bronze Age are the shipwrecks 
excavated at Cape Gelidonya (dating to c. 1200 BC, see Bass 1967) 
and Ulu Burun (c. 1305 BC, see Bass et al. 1989, Cline and Yasur- 
Landau 2007). The cargo of the Gelidonya wreck included a jar of glass 
beads, while the diverse contents of the more opulent Ulu Burun boat 
encompassed 100kg of cobalt blue glass ingots. Nicholson et al. (1997) 
have demonstrated fairly convincingly that ingot moulds excavated by 
Petrie at Amarna correspond closely to the shape and dimensions of the 
Ulu Burun ingots (see also Fig. 6.3 for a fragment of a bun-shaped, re- 
melted glass ingot from Amarna). 


Fig. 6.3. Fragment of a 
glass ingot from Amarna 
(Garstang Museum, 
University of Liverpool, 
E5654, diameter 13.3cm). 


87 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Texts and images 


Then there is the textual and visual evidence. Lexicographically some 
Egyptian texts refer to glass as inr n wdþ (stone of casting) or Gt wdht 
(stone that flows), but the equally frequent use of two foreign words for 
glass (the Hurrian term eblipakku and the Akkadian term mekku) suggests 
strongly that New Kingdom glass was a foreign import rather than an 
indigenous invention. The word psbd is also often used to refer to glass, 
although confusingly this is also the word for lapis lazuli, a substance 
that blue glass presumably was thought to replicate (and indeed the dark 
blue glass inlaid into Tutankhamun’s gold mask has been mistaken by 
some scholars for lapis lazuli, e.g. Tiradritti 1998: 235). The term for 
glass-maker/worker was probably irw psbd, and four individuals bearing 
this title are known, all dating to the New Kingdom (while, in addition, 
a craftsman in the 13th Dynasty holds the comparable title imy-r thntyw: 
‘overseer of faience-workers’, see Shortland 2007: 264-5). 

Glass features among the materials acquired by Thutmose III from 
Syria-Palestine and both listed and depicted in his Annals on the walls of 
Karnak temple (see Wreszinski 1935: Tf33a-b, Nicholson 2007: 3), and 
glass vessels imported from western Asia are also shown in the tombs 
of early 18th-Dynasty high officials Rekhmira and Kenamun in western 
Thebes (TT100: Davies 1943: 28; TT93: Davies 1930: 30-1; see Fig. 
6.4). In addition, eight of the Amarna Letters (EA14, 25, 148, 235, 
314, 323, 327 and 331) mention glass, usually as a commodity being 
imported into Egypt, although letter EA14 lists it among gifts sent by 
the Egyptian king to the king of Babylon (Moran 1992: 27-37). 

A further relevant set of texts are a group of about a dozen cuneiform 
tablets, the earliest of which date to the late 2nd millennium and come 
from Hattuša and Babylon, but the majority derive from the library of 
the Assyrian ruler Ashurbanipal (668-627 BC) at Nineveh (although 
Oppenheim et al. 1970: 28 argue that the texts they bear are copies of 
Middle Assyrian originals dating back to the mid-2nd millennium) — 
they comprise ‘recipes’ for glass, copying and re-copying what appear to 
be Late Bronze Age methods and constituents of glass-making, probably 
because of the highly ritualised attitudes to stone types and therefore 
also to the artificial materials that imitated stone. The fact that some 


88 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


Fig. 6.4. Glass vessels portrayed among the materials presented by foreign ‘tribute’ bearers to 
the vizier Rekhmira in his Theban tomb. 


of the recipes included a high degree of ritual activity is a reminder 
that for ancient scribal ‘scholars’ in the Near East, like these in Egypt, 
religion and ritual could be regarded as integral elements of scientific and 
technological procedures, in the world of glass-making, just as in the 
world of healing (as discussed in Chapter 4 above). As Robson (2001: 
54) puts it, For the scholars of Mesopotamia, coloured glass was not 
simply an attractive synthetic material but had powerful medico-magical 
properties ... the nature of coloured glass was that it resembled precious 
stone both physically and conceptually’. Nevertheless, the authenticity 
and efficacy of at least one of the Assyrian recipes, in terms of the 
practical methodology and ingredients, has been demonstrated by Brill 
(1970: 109-14), who succeeded in making ‘zukû-glass’ according to the 
recipe given by one of the tablets (Oppenheim et al. 1970: 35, Tablet A). 


Chemical analyses 


Detailed chemical analyses have been undertaken on samples of glass 
from all parts of the eastern Mediterranean and Near East, and it is 
clear from these studies that, chemically speaking, there were probably 
at least three basic forms of glass being produced in the mid to late 
2nd millennium BC: (1) a light blue/turquoise form that was made in 
Mesopotamia from a plant ash alkali and copper colorant, and (2) a dark 
blue plant ash alkali glass, with higher quantities of copper, giving it a 
colour resembling lapis-lazuli, and (3) a dark blue cobalt-natron glass 


89 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


made in Egypt. Shortland (2001: 221) provides a useful summary of 
the situation: “There is good evidence that at least some of the earliest 
copper-coloured plant ash-alkali glass to be found in Egypt was imported 
from Mesopotamia, but, at the same time, small quantities of cobalt- 
coloured natron glasses are already being produced in Egypt by local 
workers exploiting local raw materials’. 

Trace elements of certain chemicals in glass can also be examined, to 
allow similarities and differences in production methods and raw materials 
to be examined. The traces of magnesia and potassium oxide detected in 
Amarna glasses can be compared with those in glasses of similar date in 
other parts of the Near East and eastern Mediterranean (e.g. late 15th- 
to 12th-century BC samples from Pella in Jordan, 14th-century BC 
samples from Tell Brak in Syria, and 14th-century BC Minoan glasses). 
This demonstrates that Amarna glass samples are grouped quite tightly 
together compositionally, seemingly quite different to the samples from 
Tell Brak and the 13th- to 12th-century Pella glasses, but quite similar to 
the 15th-14th-century Pella glasses in terms of high magnesia content. 

Nicholson and Henderson (2000: 220) point out that there is some 
variety in the composition of Egyptian glasses of different periods: 
‘although from an early period Egyptian glass displays signs of being 
a conservative technology ..., and to some extent this is also true of 
Amarna glass, there is nevertheless some compositional variation, with 
some relatively high alumina levels occurring in translucent non-cobalt 
glasses as early as the reign of Thutmose IIT. 


Current views on Egyptian glass 


It seems, therefore, that, although glass was deliberately manufactured 
in western Asia from at least as early as c. 1500 BC, no definite evidence 
has yet been found for the fritting of glass from primary raw materials 
(the only certain evidence for primary glass-making) in either Egypt 
or Mesopotamia. Although the earliest glass has so far been found in 
Mesopotamia, it is not possible to rule out the possibility that glass 
was also fused from primary raw materials in Egypt, but perhaps at a 
slightly later date. An interesting suggestion has also been made by 
Peltenburg (1987), who argues that the production of glass may have 
involved technical input and expertise from metal-workers, who would 


90 


6. Mummifcation and glass-working 


have had the necessary experience to allow techniques for manipulating 
hot, viscous glass fluids into the form of vessels. He suggests therefore 
that the emergence of glass production in the Near East (and perhaps 
also in Egypt) by 1500 BC might have related to new Late Bronze Age 
economics and working practices, i.e. the emergence of large-scale craft 
production controlled by royal courts and temples (see Moorey 1989). 
Peltenburg’s suggestion is perhaps reinforced by the close association 
between some form of glass-working or production and a ‘copper- 
centred industrial complex’ at Qantir (Rehren et al. 2001: 236). 

Another issue that is perhaps peculiar to Egyptian glass-working 
is the clear tendency for their glass vessels — particularly the earliest 
exampes — to imitate the forms and appearances of the stone and 
faience vessels that preceded them as principal containers for cosmetics, 
oils and unguents. Lilyquist and Brill (1993) point out that the early 
glass vessels imported by the Egyptians tended to imitate their stone 
equivalents (such as those depicted in the 18th-Dynasty Theban tomb 
of Kenamun, apparently imitating marbleised stone, and thus typical 
of known Near Eastern glass vessels, see Davies 1930: 30-1, pl. XXID). 
There is also, however, a technological sense in which the early Egyptian 
glass vessels hark back to pre-glass technology, and perhaps also imply 
an initial failure to recognise the new, more malleable qualities of glass 
— four of the small group of vessels from the reign of Thutmose III were 
clearly cold-cut as if they were stone vessels, perhaps indicating that the 
(Egyptian?) craftsmen involved were unwilling or unable to fashion the 
glass with the ‘correct procedures. This also suggests that, rather than 
faience-workers or metal-workers being the obvious craftsmen to learn 
and develop the innovative new vitreous technology, it may actually have 
been stone vessel-makers that were initially involved, partly on the basis 
that they had previously been producing the main artefact that glass was 
first used for — the cosmetic vessel. 

Intriguingly, Moorey (1994: 206) notes that glass-working in the early 
1st millennium BC began to incorporate both casting and cold cutting, 
suggesting that the apparently conservative Egyptian glass-workers 
several hundred years earlier were, in another sense, ahead of their time 
-— clearly both good examples of Edgerton’s observation that ‘In use- 
centred history, technologies do not only appear, they also disappear and 
reappear, and mix and match across the centuries’ (Edgerton 2006: xii). 


91 


Chariot production: technical choice 
and socio-political change 


You can’t say civilization don’t advance, however, for in every war 
they kill you in a new way (Will Rogers, New York Times, 23 
December 1929). 


You are brought into the armoury and workshops surround you — you 
do all that you have wished. They take care of your chariot so that it 
is no longer loose. Your pole is freshly trimmed and its attachments 
are fitted on. They put bindings on your collar piece ... and they fix 
up your yoke. They apply your ensign, engraved with a chisel, and 
they put a handle on your whip and attach a lash to it. You sally forth 
quickly to fight at the pass and accomplish glorious deeds (Papyrus 
Anastasi I; British Museum, EA10247; Gardiner 1911: 28). 


Introduction 


Although the pace of technological change in military hardware was 
generally considerably slower in the distant past, there nevertheless seem 
to have been crucial phases when certain cultures went through very rapid 
processes of ‘catching up’ with their rivals. The Second Intermediate 
Period and early New Kingdom seem to have constituted just such a 
phase for Egypt. Among the most crucial Egyptian innovations ascribed 
to the late Second Intermediate Period were the horse-drawn chariot (for 
which the Egyptian terms were wrrt or mrkbt, the latter probably being a 
Semitic loan word) and the composite bow. The chariot in particular was 
of paramount social and political significance in the early New Kingdom, 
quite apart from its value as a piece of military technology (Littauer and 
Crouwel 1979, Schulman 1980). 


92 


7. Chariot production 


One ofthe Amarna Letters (EA22) includes a list of chariot components 
forming part of the dowry of a daughter of the Mitannian king Tushratta 
sent to marry Amenhotep III (Moran 1992: 51-61). Similarly, Papyrus 
Anastasi IV mentions beautiful chariots of bri-wood’ and then goes on 
to list eleven chariot parts, each of which is followed by discussion of its 
material or place of origin (P BM10249; Caminos 1954: 200-1). Finally, 
the so-called Poem concerning the royal chariot, preserved on an ostracon 
in Edinburgh and dating to the Ramessid period, includes a list of the 
various elements of the chariot and its associated weapons, and each of 
these individual pieces is linked with some particular aspect of the kings 
character, usually employing some kind of play on words (Dawson and 
Peet 1933). 

Unusually (compared with other ancient civilisations) this rich body of 
textual information on Egyptian chariots is supplemented by reasonably 
extensive surviving physical evidence. It is true that the six chariots 
from the tomb of Tutankhamun constitute the majority of the surviving 
complete examples (see Littauer and Crouwel 1985), but large numbers 
of chariot components (sometimes comprising tiny fragments of ivory, 
bone or copper alloy) have survived. This repertoire has now been greatly 
expanded by the discovery, during the 1980s, of many more pieces from 
the area of the city of Piramesse (Qantir) identified by the excavators as 
the ‘headquarters of the royal chariot-troops’ (see Herold 1999, 2007). 

The chariot was not only used in battle by the snnyw, an élite corps 
of the Egyptian army in the New Kingdom (see Fig. 7.1), but it was 
also regarded as an essential part of the royal regalia. Depictions of 
the king charging enemies in his chariot became a common feature of 


Fig. 7.1. Two Egyptian soldiers in 
a chariot, New Kingdom. 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


ea 


Fig. 7.2. Ramesses III E wild bulls in a chariot, 1st E of Medinet Habu Temple, 20th 
Dynasty. 


the exterior walls of temples as symbols of ‘the containment of unrule’ 
(Fig. 7.2), roughly comparable with the more ancient theme of the king 
smiting foreigners with a mace. In the context of the development of 
Late Bronze Age Egyptian and Near Eastern military technology, there 
are good grounds to believe that we are dealing with a very complex web 
of social and technological factors. A similarly elaborate scenario was 
encountered by Colin Renfrew in his reanalysis of the archaeological 
remains at Varna (a cemetery near the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria, 
dating to the late 5th millennium BC). In his discussion of the Varna 
material, Renfrew (1986: 146) argues that ‘the decisive innovation in 
the development of a new commodity is generally social rather than 
technical. Often the technology is already there’. A similar point is made 
by Bryan Pfaffenberger (1988: 241), who argues that ancient technology 
should be regarded as ‘a system, not just of tools, but also of related 
social behaviours and techniques’. 


94 


7. Chariot production 


The tendency in the past has been to discuss the origins of various 
innovations in Egyptian warfare in the late Second Intermediate Period 
and early New Kingdom in terms of contact between different cultural 
groups resulting in the transmission of military ideas and hardware. 
Studies have therefore concentrated on trying to find out when weapons 
or ideas first appear in the archaeological record, and, if they do not 
appear to have evolved locally, where their likely source was located. 

It is clear, however, that the process of innovation — or the means 
of adoption of new technology — is invariably much more complicated, 
involving not merely the acquisition of technological ‘packages’ or 
inventions but also, in each case, the emergence of a sympathetic set 
of social and economic conditions. In addition, it can be argued that 
military equipment and military strategy need to be seen as symbiotic 
and mutually influential - sometimes particular strategies are sparked off 
by the acquisition of new types of weapons, and sometimes the adoption 
of new methods of warfare result in the development or adoption of 
weapons that can enhance and facilitate such methods. 


The emergence of Egyptian chariotry 


The first Egyptian textual reference to chariotry is on the second Kamose 
stele, which mentions the chariots used by the Hyksos (Habachi 1972). 
The earliest examples of spoked wheels in Egypt are found on a small 
model carriage in the Theban tomb of Ahhotpe, mother of King Ahmose 
(Cairo, Egyptian Museum, JE4681; Smith 1981: 219, fig. 214). There 
are only a few previous depictions of the use of any kind of wheel at all, 
including siege-ladders running on solid wheels (one in the Sth-Dynasty 
tomb of Kaemheset at Saqqara and the other in the 11th-Dynasty tomb 
of Intef at Thebes: T"T386; for which see Quibell and Hayter 1927 and 
Jaroš-Deckert 1984: 44-7; see Fig. 7.3) and a sledge with four wheels 
pulled by oxen (in the 13th-Dynasty tomb of Sobeknakht at Elkab, 
see Tylor 1896). This dearth of any real sign of development towards a 
sophisticated horse-drawn wheeled vehicle makes it likely that the chariot 
was not invented in Egypt but introduced from the outside world, almost 
certainly from western Asia. 

As long ago as 1951, Torgny Sãve-Söderbergh argued that the 
chariot was not introduced into Egypt by the Hyksos, but that both 


95 


96 


‘s23, 1¥ J23U] [19U23 23 Jo quuo1 uuop3ury [PPI 4]3t2 2Y3 uo 19M03 a82!s 2[!qOU E SUIMOYS 29U25 ‘EL ‘BIA 


7 AT UV 


ا 


کک اکب EK‏ 


7. Chariot production 


Egyptians and Hyksos began to use it at about the same time at the 
end of the Second Intermediate Period (Sãve-Söderbergh 1951: 60). The 
importance of the social and economic contexts of technological change 
with regard to the Egyptians’ adoption of chariotry can be compared 
with a study of the introduction of the heavy horse-drawn plough into 
medieval northern Europe (White 1962). This study demonstrated that 
the time taken for this process of technological change lay not so much 
in the innovation itself but in the occurrence of the necessary changes in 
the social agricultural practices of the societies concerned, so that they 
were able to use the plough and to benefit significantly from its use. 
This case indicates that delays in the introduction of new technology are 
often to be found in social and economic processes of change rather than 
the ability to invent or replicate new technology. Spratt (1989: 255-6, 
fig. 12.5) has provided good evidence to suggest that earlier societies 
took longer to adopt innovations than later ones, presenting a graph 
that shows ‘delay times’ of various innovations from the bow and arrow 
in the 4th millennium BC to polyethylene in the 20th century AD. 
Another good archaeological example of this phenomenon is the delay 
in the appearance of techniques for casting bronze rapiers in Middle 
Bronze Age Britain (Rowlands 1976), although it should be mentioned, 
in fairness, that Stuart Piggott (1969) argues the exact opposite point of 
view: that no such socio-economic delay occurred in the introduction of 
wheeled vehicles and the plough into the cultures of Neolithic Europe. 


Preconditions for the emergence of Egyptian chariotry 


In order for a new piece of technology to be adopted, several basic factors 
need to be in place: (1) access to necessary resources or materials, (2) 
knowledge of methods of manufacture, (3) availability of suitably skilled 
craftsmen both to make and use the artefact, (4) a social need or political 
requirement for the technology in question, (5) a suitable social or 
economic context within which the technology can be deployed. If we 
study these in the case of the chariot and other military items supposedly 
introduced by the Hyksos we can get some sense of the full complexity 
of the situation. 

In the case of Egyptian chariots, these basic factors correspond to (1) 
raw materials such as wood and leather, as well as live horses, (2) several 


97 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 7.4. Scene of craft workshops on a fragment of relief decoration from a 26th-Dynasty 
tomb at Saqqara, with chariot production at the right-hand side of the lower register. 


different aspects of wood, leather, bone and metal-working technology, 
(3) access not only to craftsmen specialised in the manufacture of the 
various components of chariots, harnesses and bridles, but also to 
craftsmen with the necessary skills and knowledge to convert all these 
parts into the finished product, (4) military plans and strategies that 
would significantly benefit from the inclusion of chariot corps, and (5) 
plans for empire-building campaigns in Syria-Palestine and Nubia, as 
well as an increasingly militarised ruling group whose life-style and 
aspirations matched those of the Indo-European maryannu — an élite 
group for whom the chariot was not merely a piece of equipment but an 
important status symbol. 

The groups of workers producing chariots must have comprised one of 
the most complex of all ancient workshops, both because of the diversity 
of materials involved and the wide range of technological skills required 
(see Drenkhahn 1976: 130). Several New Kingdom tombs show groups 
of craftsmen, such as carpenters, joiners and leather-workers working on 
the different parts of a chariot (see Fig. 7.4 for a 26th-Dynasty example). 
Drenkhahn points out that all of the six tombs containing scenes of 
chariot production between the reigns of Hatshepsut and Thutmose 
IV show the activities taking place in the workshops of the Temple of 
Amun at Karnak, and four of the six occupants of the tombs had been 
employed by the Temple of Amun. It is not clear why there should be 
this connection with one specific temple estate, although Drenkhahn 
suggests that temples — as regular recipients of foreign booty and 
prisoners of war — might have had more ready access to exotic timber and 


98 


7. Chariot production 


Asiatic skilled craftsmen. From the late 18th Dynasty onwards, similar 
chariot-making scenes appear in private tombs at Saqqara, and Papyrus 
Anastasi I (British Museum, EA10247; Gardiner 1911: 1-34) provides 
an intriguing insight into the maintenance of chariotry with a description 
of an Egyptian charioteer’s visit to a repair shop in the Levantine coastal 
city of Joppa. 

To deal with the materials first: the principal materials used for a high 
quality chariot were wood, leather, rawhide, textile, bone, ivory, copper 
alloy, gold, gypsum plaster, faience, glass, stone and glue. The two most 
important materials were wood and rawhide. For the basic chassis of the 
vehicle, as well as its axle, wheels, pole and yoke (and sometimes, as in 
the case of Tutankhamun, the blinkers), various different types of wood 
were required — particularly ash (Fraxinus excelsior), imported from 
outside Egypt, which was used for the axle, felloes and frame. Two other 
imported woods were also used: field maple (Acer campestre) was used 
for the floor of the Florence chariot (see Fig. 7.5), and silver birch bark 
(Betula pendula) was used to cover an axle of a Tutankhamun chariot 
and also the axles of the Florence example. The purpose of the birch 
bark was almost certainly to waterproof the glue and rawhide holding 
the chariot together; it seems to have been used in the same way to 
waterproof composite bows. Willow (Salix subserrata, which is found 
in Egypt) was used for the Florence pole, and elm (Ulmus minor, an 
import) was used for its yoke, handrail and wheel spindles. Elm was also 
used in the chariot of Amenhotep III. Plum-wood (Prunus domestica, 
not found in Egypt) was sometimes used for the spokes. Locally available 
acacia was used for the front of the chassis. 


Fig. 7.5. Chariot from an 18th-Dynasty Theban tomb (Museo Archeologico, Florence). 


99 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Fig. 7.6. Depiction of steam bending for 
the manufacture of bows, in the tomb of 
Amenemhat at Beni Hasan. 


T'he craftsmen would have needed to use the steam-bending technique 
to actually manufacture the chariot chassis and wheels, using strips of 
unseasoned timber. Egyptian carpenters were clearly already familiar 
with this technology at least as early as the 12th Dynasty, since there are 
scenes in the tombs of Amenemhat and Baket II at Beni Hasan (BH2 
and BH15, see Newberry 1893: pls VII and XI) showing steam bending 
being used for the manufacture of bows (Fig. 7.6). In both scenes, the 
craftsmen are shown first holding wood over a pot of hot water to allow 
the steam to penetrate and soften the cellular structure, and secondly 
actually bending the stick into a hoop shape, with the ends buried in 
the ground to keep the shape. There are also Sth-Dynasty scenes in the 
tombs of Ptahshepses (Abusir) and Ty (Saqqara) showing the bending of 
dampened unseasoned poles of timber (Wild 1966: pl. CLXXIV). 

Leather was used not only for the many thongs and pieces of harness 
but also to sheathe any surfaces likely to suffer stress or abrasion. In 
addition, rawhide was shrunk over the composite wheels to hold them 
together and provide a form of tyre, and leather traces were used to lash 
the central pole to the yoke. Since we know that there were few changes 
in leather-working technology between the Middle Kingdom and New 
Kingdom (see Van Driel-Murray 2000), it follows that Egyptian leather- 
workers would already have been capable of creating such components as 
tyres, traces and blinkers well before the arrival of the Hyksos. 

Textiles were also used in chariots, primarily for ‘kickboards’, floor 
matting and housing. Two of the chariots from the tomb of Tutankhamun 
had a length of painted cloth — a kind of durable matting which would 
have been placed between the floors of chariots 120 and 122 and the side 
walls of their chassis. Vogelsang-Eastwood (2000: 276, 292) notes that 
one of these mats is made from a special kind of cloth involving a dense 
layer of long loops; she suggests that the ‘springiness of the looping’ 


100 


7. Chariot production 


would probably have helped to cushion the riders from the shaking of 
the vehicle. 

Ivory, bone, stone, copper alloy and faience were used for the many 
small components holding the chariot and the harnesses together, such 
as copper alloy nails, stone saddle knobs, and copper alloy bits and 
linchpins. An important find among the pieces discovered in site Q1 at 
Qantir was a copper alloy ‘nave cap’, which prevented the linchpin from 
grating down on the wooden nave of the chariot. The nave cap of the 
Florence chariot was made from wood. Faience and glass were used for 
inlay on chariot bodies, as well as for yoke ends, yoke saddles and bridle 
bosses. Ivory was used mainly for charioteers’ whip-stocks. 

The net result of all this is that we can be fairly sure that the Egyptians 
already had access to nearly all of the necessary materials and technology 
for chariot production by the Middle Kingdom (see Table 7.1). They did, 
however, lack several important elements: first, they may not yet have had 
ready access to such imported woods as ash, elm and birch; secondly, they 
had most of the necessary skills and craftsmen to produce the components 
but probably did not acquire the methods and personnel to transform 
these into a finished chariot until the early New Kingdom; thirdly, there is 
very little indication of access to horses before the New Kingdom. 


Technology Imports 
Steam-bending Woods 

Lathe-turning Foreign craftsmen 
Weft-loop weaving Asiatic/Nubian horses 


Increased use of leather 
Mortise and tenon joints 


Social change Military change 

Maryannu class Emergence of ‘professional’ army 

Appearance of ‘general-kings’ Diversification of military hierarchy 

Adoption of horse-riding Use of composite bows, arm-guards and plate armour 


Table 7.1. Minimum preconditions and requirements for the Egyptian adoption of 
chariotry in the early New Kingdom. 


Chariot horses 


Where did the Egyptians’ chariot horses (Equus caballus) come from, and 
what evidence has survived? There are several extant examples of horses 


101 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


from pharaonic Egypt (see Raulwing and Clutton-Brock 2009: 40-59, 
Table 1 for a full discussion of examples of horses from Middle and Late 
Bronze Age contexts in Gaza, Sinai, Egypt and Sudan, and see Spalinger 
2005: 8-13 for general discussion). The earliest horse so far found in 
Egypt is probably the skeleton excavated at Tell el1-Dab’a in 2009, amid 
the stratigraphy of the palace of the Hyksos ruler Khyan. Identified as a 
mare between 5 and 10 years old, it appears not to have been a chariot 
horse but was more likely used for breeding (no further information is 
currently available on this horse, as it awaits full publication, see Kramar 
2009; Bietak and Förstner-Miüller 2009: 98-9, Taf. 8, and Bietak 2011: 
40, for several brief preliminary discussions and photographs). 

Previously the earliest known horse found in an Egyptian archaeological 
context was tentatively assumed to be the one discovered in 1958 by Bryan 
Emery at Buhen fortress and dated stratigraphically to around 1680-1640 
BC (Emery 1960: 8-9). This horse measured 1.50m high at the withers 
(ridge between shoulder-bones), but the yoke measurements of surviving 
chariots suggest that the average Egyptian horse was probably about 
1.35m high at the withers, i.e. slightly smaller than both the Buhen and 
the average modern Arabian horse (c. 1.45m). Clutton-Brock (1974) 
assigned the Buhen horse to the type defined by Bökönyi (1968) as a 
comparatively large and heavy-limbed type found in eastern Europe and 
central Asia in the Iron Age, and she also suggested that there might be 
‘excessive wear on the lower left first cheek premolar’, perhaps indicating 
that it was fitted with a bit (Dixon et al. 1979: 192), making it likely to 
have been half of a chariot pair. Unfortunately both the stratigraphic 
record for this horse and a radiocarbon date taken in the 1970s have 
provided unclear results, making the suggested date slightly tentative. 
The archaeological context and historical significance of the Buhen horse 
have recently been reassessed by Raulwing and Clutton-Brock (2009) 
reaffirming doubts about the early date, and raising some uncertainties as 
to the existence of bit-wear on the teeth. 

Another horse, with a withers height of about 1.42m, was buried 
beside one of the tombs of Senenmut (TT71), the well-known chief of 
works in the reign of Hatshepsut. Whereas the Buhen horse appears 
simply to have been encased in the mud-brick walling built over the 
spot where it died, the Senenmut horse was actually wrapped in linen 
bandages and placed in a 2.5m-long wooden coffin. A third horse was 


102 


7. Chariot production 


found in the 18th-Dynasty necropolis at Soleb in Nubia, and its height 
was between about 1.34m and 1.38m at the withers. 

Both the Buhen and Senenmut horses appear to be basically Arabian 
in type, suggesting that the earliest examples were probably imported or 
plundered from western Asia. According to the Karnak Annals, Thutmose 
III captured more than 2000 horses after the battle of Megiddo (see 
Spalinger 2005: 90), and the 18th-Dynasty Theban tomb of Amunedjeh 
shows horses being brought by Syrians as tribute (Davies and Davies 
1941: 97). 

The earliest textual reference to horses in Egypt is the First Kamose 
Stele, which mentions those used by the Hyksos (Smith and Smith 
1976: 60); the fact that the term used for a span of horses (ptr) is an 
Asiatic loan-word suggests that both the animals and the techniques 
for training and utilising them derived from western Asia. It should 
be noted, however, that there are also strong connections between the 
Nubians and horses. Although the clearest evidence for Nubia as a 
widely recognised international source of horses and trainers begins with 
the 25th Dynasty (see Dalley 1985 and Heidorn 1997), there are also 
earlier indications of Nubian horsemanship, therefore Nubia should not 
be ruled out as a possible source of horses even as early as the Second 
Intermediate Period, which is perhaps when the Buhen horse should be 
dated. It may be significant in this regard that several of our very small 
group of surviving early Egyptian horses were actually found in Nubia. 
This is particularly interesting when we bear in mind that the Thebans 
were perhaps as much cut off from the Kerma culture in Nubia as they 
were from Syria-Palestine and the Mediterranean during the Second 
Intermediate Period (see, for instance, Bourriau 2000: 201, although see 
also Bourriau 2000: 209 for Kerma Nubians as mercenaries in the late 
17th-Dynasty Theban armies). 

Given the evidence for the high value ascribed to Nubian horses and 
horsemen ¬ and particularly their eventual use by the Assyrians for their 
chariotry and cavalry in the 7th century BC (see Dalley 1985), where 
they are specifically referred to as Kushite — the Egyptian adoption of 
chariotry by the end of the Second Intermediate Period might have been 
as much a question of Egyptians’ access to suitable horses as the process 
of technological innovation implied in the use of chariots themselves 
— in other words the recognition of the need for technological change 


103 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


is ineffectual without access to the necessary materials and resources. 
Dalley (1985: 47) argues that ‘the late 8th century was a time when 
the Assyrians were increasingly aware of the importance of equestrian 
technology. Suddenly during that period cavalry in particular developed 
into a newly powerful weapon of war. Innovation in the form of breeds 
of horses, methods of harnessing and of importing foreign experts, in 
particular from Nubia and Samaria for chariotry, from Urartu for cavalry, 
contributed to that development. It was a time when Nubia was ruled by 
kings to whom horses were one of life’s chief delights ... and free trade 
in horses flourished. Nubia benefited enormously from an expanding 
market, and reached a peak of power and prosperity. Dalley also makes 
the point that Samaria gained great prestige at this date from its role as 
entrepot supplying Nubian horses to the Assyrians for their chariotry 
(while the people of Urartu were supplying smaller horses, along with 
their trainers, for use in the Assyrian cavalry). 


The transition from simple to composite bows: military 
technology as an integrated system 


Many other innovations in Egyptian warfare seem to coincide with 
the immediate aftermath of the ‘Hyksos period’. It is often difficult to 
determine the extent to which each of these changes and innovations 
are linked in any causal way. Probably the most significant and obvious 
military development apart from chariots was the adoption of the 
composite bow (McLeod 1970). The technique of glueing strips of horn 
and sinew to a wooden self bow produced the more elastic ‘composite 
bow’, which came in two types — recurved and triangular — and had a 
considerably greater range than the self bow (see, for instance, Miller 
et al. 1986). From the point of view of the overall process of military 
change, the adoption of chariots and composite bows must have been 
very closely linked, given that there is general agreement that chariots 
served above all as highly mobile bases from which archers could pick off 
the enemy from a distance (Spalinger 2005: 15-18). 

Throughout the pharaonic period acacia wood was often used for 
bows and arrows (see Western and McLeod 1995), but the emergence of 
the composite bow led to a demand for different woods. The only known 
specimens of ash from ancient Egypt are (1) the wood of a composite bow 


104 


7. Chariot production 


from the tomb of Tutankhamun (see Gale et al. 2000: 341) as F: excelsior, 
rather than F ornus, and (2) that used for the axle, the felloes and part of 
the frame of the floor of the Florence chariot. As mentioned above in the 
case of chariots, neither ash nor birch occur naturally in Egypt, and both 
of these imports were used primarily for construction, embellishment 
and waterproofing of chariots and composite bows. Although presumably 
most horn used in Egypt was derived from native — or at any rate African 
— species, circumstantial evidence exists to suggest that the horns of 
the Cretan wild goat (agrimi) might have been imported for making 
Egyptian composite bows (Warren 1995: 7 with references). 

The introduction of the composite bow coincided with — and perhaps 
directly influenced — changes in the form of arm guards and quivers. 
New types of arm guards were introduced in the early New Kingdom 
(e.g. Berlin 15085 and Cairo JE31390, see McLeod 1982: 63), almost 
certainly because of the increasing use of the composite bow. The 
funerary depictions of the brightly coloured arm guards show them 
tied at both wrist and elbow. Unlike earlier guards, they cover much of 
the lower arm, but no actual examples seem to have survived, perhaps 
because they were made of something that would not have preserved 
well, such as padded textile. 

Tapered, round-bottomed styles of quivers replaced the Middle 
Kingdom tubular types (McLeod 1982: 62). A red quiver in the 
AÃgyptisches Museum, Berlin, now almost invisible under gelatinous 
decay, is decorated with open-work appliqués and couchwork with 
panels of superimposed coloured strips in red, white, green and black, 
with typical New-Kingdom-style green, pinked edgings. One of a pair 
of quivers from the 18th-Dynasty tomb of Maiherpri in the Valley of 
the Kings (KV36, reign of Thutmose IIT) is unusually well-preserved, 
retaining its fine, crisply executed designs in raised relief (perhaps block- 
stamped), revealing a quality of workmanship which has otherwise rarely 
survived (Cairo JE33775; see Daressy 1902: 32-3, pl. X, nos 24071-2). 
The new style of quiver was almost certainly the result of a change in 
the status of bowman and the need for both archers and their equipment 
to be incorporated into the design of the chariot. The arrow and javelin 
quivers were attached to the side-panel of the chariot in such a way and 
at such a precise angle that the charioteer could easily remove an arrow 
or javelin from the quivers when needed. 


105 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Body armour (small bronze plates riveted to linen or leather jerkins), 
was introduced by the early New Kingdom (see Hulit 2006), and a 
smaller type of shield, with a tapered lower half, began to be used. Both 
of these must presumably have been connected with the need to protect 
soldiers against the composite bow. Here we have a very clear set of cases 
where the form of one piece of technology was affected by the need to 
make it compatible with (or responsive to) another piece of technology. 
This phenomenon is discussed by Donald Mackenzie and Judy Wajcman 
in their introductory essay to The Social Shaping of Technology (1985), 
when they discuss the tendency for technology to be shaped not so much 
by science as by other technology: ‘existing technology is more than 
just a precondition of new technology, but is an active shaping force 
in its development’. In other words, each individual weapon is part of 
an organic and dynamic system, so that individual pieces of military 
technology constantly interact with one another and adapt to the system, 
operating as components in a complex and slowly changing overall 
military strategy. 


Changing systems of military reward 


Turning away from military hardware to ‘software’, it is clear that 
innovations in Egyptian weaponry in the early New Kingdom were 
accompanied by important changes in the way that the army was 
organised, and indeed the role that it played in Egyptian society. Cuomo 
makes precisely this point in relation to the introduction of different 
types of catapult (and other innovations in military technology) in the 
Hellenistic period: “To the extent to which there was a Hellenistic military 
revolution, it was a technical revolution not just because it saw the rise of 
new machines, but also because it gave wider currency and respectability 
to some features essential to technical knowledge. It propagated not 
only concrete notions about how tall a siege-tower should be or what 
material is best for catapult springs, but also a more general belief that 
one becomes a good soldier and general through training and learning, 
rather than being simply born a warrior and leader of men’ (Cuomo 
2007: 67). She therefore argues that the emergence of a new type of 
warfare based on technical knowledge and expertise brought about a 
fundamental change in the Hellenistic view of soldiery and battle — in 


106 


7. Chariot production 


other words the social repercussions of technical innovations are not to 
be underestimated. 

David Lorton (1974) has suggested, on the basis of comparisons 
between the funerary inscriptions of the 6th-Dynasty official Weni at 
Abydos and the early 18th-Dynasty soldier Ahmose son of Ibana at 
Elkab, that there may have been no system of reward for individual 
soldiers in the Old Kingdom, and that complex systems of recompense 
might not have been introduced until after the Hyksos period, possibly 
as a direct result of the adoption of Hyksos customs of warfare. Thus, 
he points out that the term skr nþ was used indiscriminately in the 
Old and Middle Kingdoms to refer both to enemies captured on the 
battlefield and to those taken while plundering defeated settlements, 
whereas from the late 18th Dynasty onwards it was used specifically to 
refer to enemy soldiers captured during the battle itself, while the term 
p3kt was used to describe people or goods captured only in the course 
of post-battle plundering, taken to the king and then redistributed as 
rewards to individual soldiers, and finally the term b3 was used in the 
18th Dynasty to designate both objects and people taken in the course 
of the actual battle and the subsequent plundering. 

As with the weaponry, we should beware of suggesting that all changes 
that emerged in the early 18th Dynasty can be ascribed to contact 
with the Hyksos. It is equally likely —- perhaps more likely — that the 
adoption of more complex systems of military recompense resulted from 
Egyptian involvement in Syria-Palestine and the consequent absorption 
of the ‘language’ of Asiatic warfare. In the same way, the Egyptians had 
clearly adopted Akkadian cuneiform script as the basis for international 
diplomatic communication by at least the middle of the 18th Dynasty (see 
Cohen and Westerbrook 2000), if not considerably earlier (see van Koppen 
and Radner 2009 and Bietak 2011: 41 for the discovery of a fragment of 
a cuneiform letter probably sent to Egypt by a late Old Babylonian ruler, 
dating to the Second Intermediate Period at Tell el-Dab’a). 


Conclusions 


Many innovations in Egyptian military equipment and strategies 
resulted directly from population movements, exchange of ideas between 
different ethnic and cultural groups, and processes of social change 


107 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


brought on both by large-scale environmental and political influences. 
Such innovations in military hardware went on to have significant effects 
on the social and political contacts between Egypt and the Levant, and 
between Egypt and the rest of northeastern Africa. The chronology of 
all this, however, suggests that the turning point for the Egyptians was 
not the arrival of the Hyksos but their departure. 

It seems as if the Hyksos may have represented a significant barrier 
between the Egyptians and access to more sophisticated weaponry such 
as chariots, composite bows and body-armour (although see Moorey 
2001 for an alternative view on this). It was only after the removal of 
the Hyksos that the Egyptians were able to gain access both to some 
of the necessary imported materials and probably also, initially at least, 
foreign craftsmen, so that they could begin to manufacture these new 
weapons. Many of the materials (such as acacia-wood, copper alloy, 
bone, stone, faience and rawhide) and much of the technological ability 
(such as steam-bending, lathe-turning and drilling) had already been 
available for some time within Egypt itself, but the crucial changes were 
the social and political ones, whereby Egyptians gained ready access to 
the resources of western Asia. Once they were able to import materials, 
craftsmen, horses and experienced charioteers, they could begin to create 
their own vehicles and to incorporate chariotry and horse-riding ‘scout’ 
divisions into their own military strategies. 

In conclusion it is worth noting that an intriguing aspect of Egyptian 
chariotry — and one that is particularly evident in the Qadesh battle 
reliefs — is the number of ways in which Egyptian chariots appear to 
have differed from their Hittite and Syrian counterparts. Whereas the 
Egyptian chariots had a two-man crew and are shown with quivers 
attached for the archer, the Hittite and Syrian chariots are shown with 
three occupants, comprising a shield-bearer in front of the driver and a 
spearman behind him, and apparently no quivers for arrows or javelins. 
A less obvious difference between Egyptian and Hittite chariots is in the 
technology used to produce the ‘snaffle bits’ (see Herold 1999: 137-9). 

If the Qadesh reliefs are a genuine reflection of differences between 
Egyptian and Asiatic chariot crews and their weapons, then we may 
have a situation comparable with that of the American and Soviet 
development of ballistic missiles after the war. Both sides started off 
with a fundamentally similar technological prototype — in the case of the 


108 


7. Chariot production 


Egyptians and Hittites, the basic chariot of the 17th and 16th centuries 
BC, and in the case of the Americans and Soviets, the V2 rocket 
developed by the Germans during the Second World War. Mackenzie 
and Wajcman (1985: 10) describe the situation as follows: ‘American 
and Soviet missile designers ... developed significantly different missiles, 
despite their shared use of the V-2 as departure point’. 

In the case of both modern and ancient divergences in the use of 
technology, whether we are talking about chariots or missiles, there are 
clear indications that even cultures or ethnic groups sharing a common 
paradigm will find that their individual technological trajectories can vary 
considerably as a result of social, political and strategic factors. To take 
another recent example of socially determined trajectories in technology, 
the 20th-century dominance of the gasoline-powered car, as opposed 
to electrically powered vehicles, can be seen to have its origins not in 
decisions made on the basis of pure efficiency but in the economics of 
early 20th-century gender relations — thus women drivers clearly preferred 
electric cars, but it was primarily men who determined which car a family 
would have, thus leading to the virtual demise of the electric car by the 
1930s, despite the fact that, for short trips, the latter was cleaner, quieter 
and easier to run: “it is not some sort of simple “best” technology that 
always wins. It is a matter of the cultural ideals, economic relations, and 
social power relations that define what counts as best, for whom, and for 
whose preferred activities and values’ (Bauchspies et al. 2006: 36). 


109 


Military hardware: the east Mediterranean 
knowledge economy and the emergence 
of the Iron Age in Egypt 


The glue holding the Amarna system together was exchange — 
commercial, dynastic, and cultural ... while proclaiming their self- 
sufficiency, Great Kings in fact depended on each other for the 
supply of various key items, such as gold, iron and horses (Cohen 
and Westbrook 2000: 226). 


Introduction 


This chapter looks at the ways in which the surviving textual information 
about Egyptian and Hittite approaches to military technology and strategy 
in the Late Bronze Age can be enhanced and supplemented by visual 
evidence in the many Egyptian battle reliefs of the Late Bronze Age. It 
also compares the Hittite weaponry and tactics with those that appear 
to have been employed by the Egyptians, in order to try to gain some 
sense of what might be described as the ‘knowledge network’ of warfare 
in the Late Bronze Age. To what extent did two of the great empires 
of the Late Bronze Age differ from one another in their attitudes and 
approaches to battle, and, most importantly perhaps, to what extent can 
we see their approaches ‘converging’ during this period as people, ideas 
and artefacts flowed back and forth in the form of booty, prisoners of 
war and élite diplomatic exchange (see Fig. 8.1 for a map of the eastern 
Mediterranean and Near East in the Late Bronze Age)? 

A closely related issue is the set of possible mechanisms by which war 
affects technology. Joel Mokyr (1990: 183) raises the question of cause 
and effect: Whether in fact innovations in military technology provided 


110 


8. Military hardware 
Black Sea 


attusa 


0 ا‎ Van 


HITTITE EMPIRE 
Rifer Tigris Lake Urmia 
Ningveh 


MEDITERRANEAN 9 KssUr 
SEA Qadesh 


e Damascus 


Dead Sea‏ 1 سا 
Piramesse‏ 
۹ 


Memphis 


Red Sea 


BABYLONIA 


@ Babylon 


Fig. 8.1. Map of the Eastern Mediterranean and Near East in the Late Bronze Age. 


substantial benefits in the production of peacetime goods and services 
so that war can be thought of as an agent of technical progress is far 
from easy to determine.’ In fact Mokyr goes on to argue that ‘although 
military needs served at times as “focusing devices” ... weapons were 
more often borrowers of civilian technology than sources of inspiration 
for it (Mokyr 1990: 186). In the context of the development of Late 
Bronze Age east Mediterranean and Near Eastern military technology, 
there is no doubt that, as in other periods and places, we are dealing 
with a very complex web of social and technological factors (see Chapter 
7 above). 

Throughout the images depicting Near Eastern and east Mediterranean 
warfare there are a number of constantly repeated iconographic motifs, 
such as rulers smiting foreigners, the siege and capture of settlements, 


111 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


the binding and execution of prisoners, and the offering of the spoils 
of war to the gods (see Heinz 2001 and Hall 1986). These acts can all 
be encompassed within a very simple theme in which the role of these 
rulers was to fight battles on behalf of the gods and then bring back the 
prisoners and booty to dedicate to the gods in their temples. However, a 
number of questions might be asked concerning such images, as well as 
the later paintings and reliefs documenting acts of war. One of these is 
equally relevant both to the question of the ancient knowledge economy 
of the eastern Mediterranean and to the nature of military technology 
and warfare in this region: to what extent were these earliest depictions 
of battle always an oversimplification of the real pragmatic political 
military situation, and to what extent might they misrepresent the true 
detail of warfare and weaponry? 

The tendency in the past has been to discuss the origins of various 
innovations in east Mediterranean warfare in the Late Bronze Age in 
terms of contact between different cultural groups resulting in the 
transmission of military ideas and hardware. Studies have therefore 
concentrated on trying to find out when weapons or ideas first appear 
in the archaeological record, and, if they do not appear to have evolved 
locally, where their likely source was located. In this chapter, however, it 
is argued that military equipment and military strategy need to be seen as 
symbiotic and mutually influential - sometimes particular strategies are 
sparked off by the acquisition of new types of weapons, and sometimes 
the adoption of new methods of warfare result in the development or 
adoption of weapons that can enhance and facilitate such methods. 

How then does the knowledge economy of military strategy and 
weaponry appear in the iconography of battle reliefs and in the terminology 
and tone of the Near Eastern diplomatic correspondence? Do the two 
types of source material overlap and/or correspond with one another? How 
are commodities (weapons), ideas (strategies) and people (e.g. mercenaries 
and prisoners of war) moving around the east Mediterranean in the Late 
Bronze Age? What do we know from Anatolian sources; what do we glean 
from Egyptian texts and images; and how well do these two bodies of 
source material correlate? The key factor here, as far as east Mediterranean 
technology is concerned, is ‘convergence’ — arguably the technologies for 
stone vessel-making were gradually becoming relatively homogeneous 
throughout the region during the Bronze Age (see Sparks 2001). Research 


112 


8. Military hardware 


into vitreous materials in the eastern Mediterranean also suggests that 
there was an extremely complex convergence of materials and techniques 
in this area of technology: °... the main body of Aegean Bronze Age 
faience, as well as Egyptian blue frit and glass fits into the general Aegean 
iconography and is thus considered as a characteristic Aegean product. 
There are, however, technical, compositional and even stylistic similarities 
with both the Near East and Egypt (Panagiotaki et al. 2004: 150). 

A number of scholars (e.g. Oppenheim 1978 and Moorey 1989) 
have discussed the likely role played by royal courts and diplomatic 
systems in Bronze Age processes of technological contact and exchange 
(see particularly Chapters 3 and 6 above, on scribes and glass-workers 
respectively). Moorey (2001: 4) argues that ‘It was not accidental that 
courts were central to technological developments. Only in such places 
were the necessary resources in terms of labour and materials, tools and 
workshops readily available on an appropriate scale.’ To what extent was 
this process of transmission via royal courts and international diplomatic 
correspondence also true of military technology and tactics? 


Policy and strategy in the Hittite and Egyptian 
spheres of influence 


To begin with the broadest strategic and political sphere of warfare, we 
can look at the evidence for Hittite and Egyptian responses to the ideas 
of empire-building and conquest. Trevor Bryce (2002: 100) suggests 
that, as far as the Hittite ruler was concerned, ‘though his kingdom was 
geared to a state of constant military preparedness, the king himself 
was never the instigator of aggression, at least to his way of thinking’. 
In other words, even at its height, the Hittite rulers and their officials 
might be considered to have been in a state of denial as to their repeated 
undertaking of hostile acts of conquest. Interestingly, the same situation 
has also been argued to prevail in Egypt: Spalinger (1982: 240) argues 
that °... the king is the passive component of war. He acts only after he 
has received news of foreign unrest. His armies are dispatched only after 
others have stirred up trouble’. Both Bryce and Spalinger are keen to point 
out, however, that these were probably calculated postures deliberately 
evoked by both the Egyptian and Hittite texts, and that the real situation 
can sometimes be read, between the lines, as one of ruthless pragmatism. 


113 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Nevertheless, the fact remains that two of the major powers of the Late 
Bronze Age east Mediterranean share a tendency to consciously and 
purposefully present foreign conquests almost as accidents rather than 
as the result of careful Realpolitik strategies, whereas the latter is the 
clear impression given by Late Bronze Age diplomatic correspondence 
between the Egyptian rulers and their rivals and vassals in western 
Asia (see, for example, the social-psychological analysis of the Amarna 
Letters: Druckman and Güner 2000: 176). 

How then do the Great Powers of the Late Bronze Age differ in terms of 
their specific military strategies? One of the most fundamental questions 
in the study of Egyptian warfare is whether battles were opportunist, 
unpredictable affairs, or whether, like Classical Greek conflicts, there 
was an element of ritual not merely in the depictions of the battles but 
in the actual confrontations between armies. There is perhaps some 
evidence for a tendency towards more symbolic confrontations in the 
whole paraphernalia of diplomacy and agreements throughout the Near 
East, and Yadin (1963: 100) and Goedicke (1985: 83) have both argued 
that the location and date of the Megiddo and Qadesh battles might 
have been pre-arranged by the two sides. Although many Egyptologists 
would certainly not agree with so radical an interpretation of the 
surviving reliefs and papyri documenting these events, which seem too 
unique and idiosyncratic to be regarded as mere large-scale rituals, there 
are certain recurring motifs (such as the heroism of the king in adversity 
and his tendency to advocate daring tactics in place of the cautious plans 
of his generals). Nevertheless, the course of each battle was evidently 
spontaneous, and there is no question of anything as predictable as the 
clash of hoplite phalanxes. Thus, although the time and place of crucial 
battles in the Late Bronze Age may at least sometimes have been pre- 
arranged, their forms were invariably unpredictable. Goedicke (1985: 83) 
is undoubtedly rather stretching the evidence when he claims that ‘the 
notion of surprise as a legitimate strategic move is not an ancient Near 
Eastern concept’, although he does concede that Egyptian siege warfare 
might have included surprise tactics. 

Although the Egyptians often appear to criticise the Asiatics for their 
use of guerilla tactics, this does not necessarily imply that they never used 
such methods themselves. In The Instruction Addressed to King Merikare, 
the supposed author, a ruler of the Heracleopolitan period (c. 2081-1987 


114 


8. Military hardware 


BC) named Khety, complains that ‘the vile Asiatic ... does not announce 
the day of battle, like a thief whom a gang has rejected ... The Asiatic 
is a crocodile on its river bank that snatches from a lonely road but 
cannot take from the quay of a populous town’ (Parkinson 1997: 223-4). 
Khety’s criticism, however, is perhaps directed more at the Asiatics’ lack 
of ambition or heroism than their use of unorthodox tactics. 

In the various depictions of the Battle of Qadesh, Broadhurst (1992: 
78) has pointed out that Ramesses needed assistance to defeat the vast 
number pitted against him. In three scenes he receives it from a chariot 
troop ... who trap the Hittites occupying the area behind the king, in one 
of the earliest examples of an ambush.’ In addition, Raban (1989: 163) 
argues, with reference to Ramesses IIFs defeat of the Sea Peoples: ‘The 
famous battle scene from his temple at Medinet Habu depicts a twin 
encounter: one on the land an one in the water ... From the attached texts 
and from the references to this battle in Papyrus Harris I, it appears as if 
the naval battle was much like the land battle —- an ambush, or a surprise 
attack of combined Egyptian military units on a mass of immigrants ... . 


Iconogr aphy versus texXtS 


If Late Bronze Age military tactics can be argued to be relatively 
homogeneous throughout the east Mediterranean, and perhaps only 
significantly influenced by differences in terrain, topography and overall 
political aims, what is the situation concerning soldiers and military 
technology? How much overlap was there between the characteristics 
of the troops and weaponry used by Hittites and Egyptians? As Gurney 
pointed out over fifty years ago, the Hittites’ own depictions of their 
infantry warriors differ from those portrayed by the Egyptians (Gurney 
1954: 88-9). Whereas the Hittites show them wearing short belted 
tunics only reaching down to a point above the knee, the Egyptian reliefs 
suggest that they wore long gowns with short sleeves. The weaponry 
also differs: the figure of a Hittite warrior-god from the jamb of the 
King’s Gate at Hattuša (Boghazköy) wears a belted kilt and helmet, and 
is armed with an axe and short sword, whereas the typical Egyptian 
image of the Hittite soldier tends to show him carrying a spear, which 
is usually not shown by the Hittite artists until a later date. One possible 
answer is that many of the soldiers depicted in the Egyptian reliefs were 


115 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


١ 


1 


1 
8) 


` 
1 = 
: FR 2 | 3 a 
۱ ۳ ٢ ۴ 4 ١ 3 7 
EY ١ ب‎ 
س‎ 2 FT LAS 9 8 
4 ‘Af 07 iy 
OTEK 


Fig. 8.2. Scene from the Battle of Qadesh, as depicted on an external wall of the temple of 
Ramesses II at Abydos, showing Egyptian chariots and charioteers — the figure in the centre 
wears the short kilt typical of Egyptian soldiers. 


not actually Hittite but from other ethnic groups within the Hittite 
empire and sphere of influence. Another likely answer, however, is that 
the Egyptians deliberately depict the Hittites and their allies in this 
non-Egyptian costume in order to clearly distinguish them from the 
Egyptian soldiers, whose short kilt (see Fig. 8.2) would otherwise have 
easily been confused with that of the enemy. 

Schulman (1988: 54-5) discusses some of the detailed images of 
Akhenaten’s first campaign against the Hittites, recorded on talatat 
blocks from Karnak. Talatat F-1253-4 shows Hittites depicted with 
pigtail-style sidelocks. On two other talatat (Schulman 1988: pls 14.1-2) 
helmets are shown as part of the battlefield debris. This type of helmet 
is fairly distinctive squat, open-faced form with a neck protector and 
plumed crest — it appears to be the so-called gurpisu Fasippari suppuru 
(‘plumed bronze helmet’) typically found in the Near East in the late 2nd 
millennium BC, which in fact is the kind of helmet worn by the warrior 
god at Boghazköy mentioned above. Here however this headgear is 
shown worn by both Hittites and Egyptians, suggesting further blurring 
of the traditionally strict boundaries of weaponry and costume. Kendall 
(1981: 215-21) argues that helmets of this distinctive so-called Syrian 
type were actually produced in Egypt. 

In the 1983-4 seasons of excavation at Qantir (Piramesse), in the 
Egyptian eastern Delta, eight limestone ‘moulds’ for shields were found, 
each measuring around 1.25 x 1.25m (Pusch 1996: 142-4, figs 135-8). 


116 


8. Military hardware 


These moulds, however, were not designed to produce the standard 
Egyptian rectangular shield; instead they were designed to produce 
typical Hittite trapezoidal or figure-of-eight shields, one incorporating 
a stylised version of a bull's head probably referring to a Hittite weather- 
god. Craftsmen would have used the moulds to hammer out the sheets 
of copper alloy that would form the outer edges of wood and leather 
shields. Here we therefore have evidence of direct collaboration between 
Egyptian and Hittite workers, operating on Egyptian soil, to produce 
weaponry that would usually be considered quintessentially non- 
Egyptian. It is by no means clear quite why or how this technological 
exchange was taking place, but it places another question mark over 
the apparently rigid distinction between Egyptian weaponry and that of 
their rivals. Pusch argues that the dating of the Hittite shield moulds 
could theoretically relate to one or other of three events in the reign 
of Ramesses II: the arrival in Egypt of the deposed Hittite ruler Urhi 
Teshup, the year 21 peace-treaty between Ramesses and the Hittite ruler 
Hattusilis III, and the year 34 marriage to the Hittite princess who was 
given the Egyptian name of Maat-hor-neferu-ra, recorded in the ‘marriage 
stele’ at Abu Simbel. He suggests that the last of these is most likely, on 
the grounds of the stratigraphic position of one of the shield-moulds 
(linking it with pillars inscribed with the ‘royal protocol of Ramesses II in 
regnal year 30 (Pusch 1996: 144). 

Van Dijk (2000: 300) has argued that the scenario for this Egypto- 
Hittite technological exchange must belong to the late Ramessid period: 
‘Many foreigners lived in the city [of Piramesse] some of whom eventually 
became high-ranking officials ... As a result of the peace treaty with 
the Hittites, specialist craftsmen sent by Egypt's former enemy were 
employed in the armoury workshops of Piramesse to teach the Egyptians 
their latest weapons technology, including the manufacture of much- 
sought-after Hittite shields. 


The depiction of the year 8 battle of Ramesses III 
against the Sea Peoples 


The principal innovations in military tactics and technology that emerged 
in the Egyptian battles of the New Kingdom, compared with earlier 
conflicts, probably stemmed from the introduction of the composite 


117 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


\ 


۱ 
> 
0 2 
1 


° 


SED) 
N 


E VS 


Fig. 8.3. Scene from the battle against the Sea Peoples during the reign of the 20th-Dynasty 
ruler, Ramesses III, from the exterior northern wall of his mortuary temple at Medinet Habu, 
showing an Egyptian boat containing oarsmen, archers and foot soldiers. 


bow and the chariot. The importance of the chariot was simply that 
it conferred mobility — it enabled archers to move around the battle- 
field more rapidly, but ultimately the battle, whether siege or open 
confrontation, was still considered to consist of two basic components: 
first bowmen and secondly infantry armed with spears and axes. The 
Medinet Habu reliefs depicting the famous naval encounter with the Sea 
Peoples in the reign of Ramesses III (c. 1182-1151 BC) show that the 
same situation applied even to sea battles - boats were were used as sea- 
borne chariots containing groups of oarsmen, archers and footsoldiers 
(see Fig. 8.3). They allowed the Egyptians to encircle the enemy, while 
releasing hails of arrows, eventually closing in on the enemy’s own boats, 
so that the infantry could engage in conventional hand-to-hand fighting. 

The Medinet Habu reliefs showing the naval battle include depictions 
of ships that appear very similar regardless of the occupants — all of 
them appear to be modified versions of Aegean light galleys and Late 
Bronze Age Syrian merchant ships (the latter being the prototype of the 
Phoenician hippos vessel). Although those manned by Egyptian soldiers 
or their allies incorporate Egyptian-style aftercastles and rudders, the 
basic nature of each of the boats is very similar, suggesting that the 
emerging sea-powers of the Late Bronze Age were not necessarily 


118 


8. Military hardware 


employing hardware that was culturally or ethnically distinct. The 
boats of Sea Peoples and Egyptians, as depicted at Medinet Habu, both 
appear to have been very similar amalgams of east Mediterranean naval 
technology, and in fact, as Raban (1989: 170) suggests, ‘It is therefore 
tempting to assume that the type of boat the Egyptian artist has selected 
to represent the Egyptian navy was actually a vessel introduced by the sea 
peoples.” Raban (1989: 171) therefore concludes that ‘the specialization 
and the technical innovations that are shown in both types [i.e. both 
Sea Peoples’ and Egyptians’ boats] were very probably the outcome 
of century-long extensive naval encounters between rival parties — the 
sea peoples, the Canaanites and the Egyptians’. As in the case of the 
land-based weaponry discussed above, the development of the naval 
technology of the eastern Mediterranean in the Late Bronze Age seems 
to have involved extensive technology transfer even between supposed 
rivals. This may also have extended to tactics, with Ramesses III's army 
and navy evidently trapping the Sea Peoples by blockading the mouths 
of rivers, thereby ‘catching the enemy like birds in a net’ — this strategy 
may resemble ‘riverine’ tactics acribed to the Sea Peoples themselves in a 
text from Ugarit (RS.20.238, see Wachsmann 1981: 181). 


The spread of military hardware and software through 
mercenaries, prisoners of war and diplomatic ‘packages’ 


What then were the physical, practical mechanisms by which military 
technology and tactics were disseminated and shared in the Late Bronze 
Age knowledge economy of the east Mediterranean? Such ‘mercenaries? 
as the Sherden brought with them their own types of weaponry and 
tactics (see Fig. 8.4), and this can be seen to be happening both with ‘free’ 
mercenaries and with enforced prisoner-of-war-style mercenaries. This 
is surely the most effective form of transmission of changes in material 
culture and mentalities, but diplomacy (through exchange of people and 
artefacts and through establishment of ‘embassies’”) is probably the other 
principal mechanism. 

The coincidence of several features of recent excavations at Qantir 
suggest that diplomatic activity and technology transfer might have 
been closely linked. Not only have the Hittite shield moulds, described 
above, been found, but in 1999, in the area of the city designated QVII, 


119 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


1 


eS 


Fig. 8.4. Scene from an external wall of the temple of Ramesses II at Abydos, showing a group 
of Sherden mercenaries, with their distinctive helmets, shields and swords. 

part of a cuneiform tablet was unearthed (Spencer 2004: 26-7), raising 
the possibility that a Ramessid archive like that at Amarna might have 
existed in the vicinity. Even if this small fragment — only 5 x 5cm and 
bearing just 11 lines of text — turns out to be an isolated find, it hints 
at the possibility that the population of Piramesse included not only 
Hittite craftsmen but also perhaps a relatively permanent staff of Hittite 
‘embassy’ officials. The finds of shield-moulds and tablet are linked by 
EA22, a letter in the Amarna archive that was sent by Tushratta, ruler of 
the western Asiatic kingdom of Mitanni, to Amenhotep III of Egypt, in 
which a list of élite diplomatic gifts sent to Egypt includes ‘one leather 
shield with urukmannu of silver weighing ten shekels’ (the Hurrian term 
urukmannu probably referring to the outer metal parts of a shield). 

The excavations at Qantir have also yielded a worked boar’s tusk 
(82/0849, see Pusch 1996: fig. 134), which may have been part of a 
cheek-piece from a Mycenaean-=style helmet. Once again a find from 
Amarna provides a context both confirming the integration of foreign’ 
equipment within Egyptian weaponry and the likely long-term nature of 
such integration and exchange: fragments of a painted papyrus excavated 


120 


8. Military hardware 


from building R43.2 at Amarna include two soldiers within the Egyptian 
army apparently depicted wearing boar’s tusk helmets and cropped ox- 
hide tunics, which would probably identify them as Mycenaean infantry 
within the Egyptian army in the mid-14th century BC (British Museum 
EA74100, see Parkinson and Schofield 1993; Schofield and Parkinson 
1994). The presence of a fragment of such a helmet at Qantir suggests 
that other non-Egyptian weaponry may have been used, and perhaps 
even manufactured, at the city of Piramesse in the Ramessid period. 

The Qantir and Amarna finds, the latter dating from at least a century 
earlier than the former, paint a possible picture of eastern Mediterranean 
military technology transfer taking place within a diplomatic context 
for much of the New Kingdom. Table 8.1 compares the ‘traditional’ 
assumptions concerning mechanisms of Late Bronze Age technology 
transfer with the recent evidence concerning such processes. 


Traditional assumptions Recent evidence 

Booty/spoils ‘Embassies’ 

‘High level’ trade ‘Low level’ trade 

Prisoners of war Entourages of foreign princesses 
‘Mercenaries’ Technological ‘packages’ 


Table 8.1. Technological transfer and ‘convergence’ in the Late Bronze Age. 


The painted temple reliefs depicting some of the great battles of the 
Late Bronze Age have a tendency, not surprisingly, to oversimplify the 
situation — the Egyptian depictions accentuate the ethnic stereotypes 
of individual soldiers, and in order to make the battles easier to ‘read’ 
as narratives of confrontations between state armies, they use a kind of 
visual shorthand with which we need to deal very cautiously. However, 
if some of the details of these battle reliefs are interpreted sufficiently 
carefully — and placed in the context of the recent finds, such as the 
Hittite (and possible Mycenaean) material at Qantir - we can gain a 
strong sense of the complex reservoir of ideas and weaponry from which 
each of the great states of the Late Bronze Age east Mediterranean 
were drawing. In other words, the features which appear to be typically 
Hittite, Syrian, Cretan, Mycenaean or Egyptian about armies, and in 
particular their weaponry and tactics, need to be balanced against the 
lingua franca of warfare that undoubtedly existed. None of these armies 
existed in isolation from one another, and although there clearly were 


121 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


differences between the major armies at each point in time, such as the 
different style and manning of Hittite chariots compared with those of 
the Egyptians at Qadesh, they also had a great deal in common, and the 
degree to which they shared tactics, weaponry and personnel is not to be 
underestimated. 

If there was a Late Bronze Age equivalent of the modern knowledge 
economy then it can be seen to have permeated the field of military 
technology, ensuring that soldiers, tactics and weaponry ebbed and flowed 
between different armies and states rather than being fixed components 
of ethnic groups. This also has repercussions for our approach to the 
study of ancient weaponry, the technology and dissemination of which 
may not have been so clearly delineated by cultural and ethnic boundaries 
as we have previously assumed. Carmen and Harding (1999: 250) argue, 
‘We are interested in particular types of objects - among them weapons 
— because we are interested in the role those objects played in a past 
culture, what was the nature of their social life, and not just in how they 
achieved their end of killing or wounding an opponent.’ 

Returning to Joel Mokyr’s discussions of technological and economic 
change, his observations on medieval Europe might equally be applied 
to the east Mediterranean of the Late Bronze Age: ‘the Europeans were 
willing to learn from each other. Inventions such as the spinning wheel, 
the windmill and the weight-driven clock recognized no boundaries’ 
(Mokyr 1990: 188). It is also worth considering, however, that military 
technology ¬ weaponry ¬ may have existed and evolved within a 
particularly rich context of cultural exchange networks, which we may be 
severely underestimating by our tendency to stereotype them in ethnic 
terms. 


The delayed Egyptian Iron Age: military and 
technological repercussions 


One aspect of military technology that was already emerging during the 
Late Bronze Age was the introduction of iron weaponry. Throughout 
the Near East, iron seems to have been more frequently produced from 
about the mid-1st millennium BC onwards, thus suggesting that this 
was technically when the Iron Age began in the region as a whole. The 
one country where this did not happen was Egypt, and it is sometimes 


122 


8. Military hardware 


suggested that the Egyptians’ lack of iron weapons might have played a 
large part in their conquest by the Assyrians (c. 667 BC) and Persians (c. 
525 BC). Moorey (1994: 286), however, argues that iron weapons were 
not necessarily superior to their bronze equivalents, even in the Neo- 
Babylonian period, and that, as far as Assyrian transition from bronze to 
iron was concerned, ‘the vital factors may have been more political than 
technological in the strict sense’, by which he means that the expanding 
Assyrian empire of the 9th century BC came into contact with peoples in 
Syria and Anatolia who had already developed sophisticated methods of 
iron-working, and that this, combined with their sophisticated political 
organisation, pushed the Assyrians away from bronze and towards more 
widespread manufacture of iron weapons (the whole process being 
probably exacerbated by a shortage of tin): ‘the Assyrian state, moreover, 
in the Neo-Assyrian period, had the capacity to set up the necessary 
industrial infrastructure for the extensive exploitation of iron’ (Moorey 
1994: 287). 

In the mid-19th century Christian Jurgensen Thomsen invented 
the so-called Three Age System when he organised the prehistoric 
artefacts in the National Museum of Antiquities at Copenhagen into 
a chronological order that corresponded to a sequence of three cultural 
stages distinguished by the use of stone, bronze and iron respectively 
(Thomsen 1836, Grãslund 1981). Thomsen’s work laid the foundations 
for the chronology of European prehistory, and the Three Age System 
has subsequently been applied by European historians to many other 
parts of the world. However, not all cultures across the world can be 
equally easily defined according to the use of different materials for tool- 
making, and the Egyptian ‘Iron Age’ is a good example of the problems 
inherent in attempting to use a material-based chronological system of 
this type on a world-wide basis (cf. Beaujard 2010). 

The absorption of Egypt into the Achaemenid empire took place in 
about 600 BC, just around the time that iron became so common in 
Mesopotamia that it replaced copper as the cheapest metal (Haarer 2001: 
264-5, Warburton 2003: 254). Why was iron not widely used in Egypt 
until the late 1st millennium BC, when the rest of the Near East had 
been experiencing a full-fledged Iron Age from at least the middle of the 
1st millennium (see Moorey 1994: 289-90)? There is no cultural vacuum 
between the Egyptian Late Bronze Age and the early Ptolemaic period. 


123 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Indeed, in a sense, the Late Period corresponds to Egypt's early Iron 
Age, and Egyptian culture was by no means technologically moribund 
during this period of seven centuries. The material culture of Late Period 
Egypt is full of vibrant and innovative developments in the working of 
materials and manufacturing of artefacts. Nevertheless, there seems little 
doubt that iron took an unusually long time to become a core element 
of the Egyptian economy. 

The widespread use of iron throughout the ancient world was generally 
delayed not by lack of access to supplies of iron ore (which is often 
more plentifully available than copper or tin) but by the fact that iron 
smelting and manufacturing techniques took some considerable time 
to be developed. Although iron melts at a much higher temperature 
than most other metals, such as copper, tin, silver and gold, it can be 
smelted (i.e. released from the ore) at similar temperatures to copper 
(1100-1150°C). The real problem is that the actual smelting techniques 
are much more complex, and that the subsequent stages of processing 
(e.g. forging, hammering and carburisation) only emerged after long 
periods of diffcult experimentation. However, once these technological 
developments had appeared, the Iron Age would have had several clear 
advantages over the previous copper-alloy-based economies. First, the 
wider availability of iron ore meant that metal artefacts could be produced 
locally and therefore often more cheaply; secondly, the blades of iron 
tools and weapons usually had a tougher, sharper cutting edge than their 
copper alloy equivalents. 

Anthony Snodgrass (1980) has outlined three basic stages in the 
transition from copper alloy to iron, the first being the occasional use 
of iron as an expensive ornamental item, the second the use of iron for 
standard implements (but at a less frequent level than copper), and the 
third the situation in which iron predominates over copper as a working 
metal, although not necessarily entirely displacing it. While there seems 
to be broad scholarly agreement with the three basic stages outlined by 
Snodgrass, there has been considerable criticism of the details of his 
theory, such as the speed with which the transition is supposed to have 
happened in the Mediterranean region (within about two hundred years) 
and the fact that the greater use of iron (and its increasing cheapness) is 
said to be caused at least partly by a growing shortage of copper and tin, 
particularly during the third stage of the transition. There has also been 


124 


8. Military hardware 


much debate as to whether Cyprus and the Aegean were really central to 
this change, as Snodgrass (1980: 338-9) argues, or whether they were 
peripheral to major innovations that took place first in Mesopotamia, 
as Peter Haarer (2001) has suggested. In other words, the problem of 
Egypt's late arrival in a true Iron Age is exacerbated by considerable 
uncertainty as to how, why and precisely when iron-working appeared 
elsewhere in the eastern Mediterranean. 

The evidence for iron-working in the Near East during the 2nd 
millennium derives mainly from textual sources. It is clear from such 
documents that at this time iron was worth about five times as much 
as gold, and it was among the high prestige materials that the great 
kings of the region were sending to one another as gifts (Feldman 2006, 
Pons Mellado 2006). A few New Kingdom examples of such gifts have 
survived in Egypt, including the well-known golden-hilted iron dagger 
in the tomb of Tutankhamun, which is thought likely to have been 
presented to him by a contemporary Hittite ruler (Feldman 2006: 16). 
The most important implication of Tutankhamun’s dagger is that iron 
was at this date (c. 1330 BC) still very much an exotic precious material 
from an Egyptian point of view. It was in fact not until the very late 
1st millennium BC that iron was widely used in Egypt (i.e. Snodgrass’s 
stage 3). It should be noted, however, that there are instances of relatively 
early use of iron in Egypt, at a date when it is likely to have taken the 
form of opportunistic use of meteoric iron — these would in a sense lie 
outside Snodgrass’s three stages, as they tend to be utilitarian rather than 
prestigious ornamental uses (see Tylecote 1992: 3, 51). Ogden (2000: 
166-7) points out the difficulties in securely identifying the examples 
of likely meteoric iron used in Egypt as early as the late 4th and early 
3rd millennia BC ¬ usually meteoric iron is assumed to be unusually 
high in nickel content (Lucas 1962: 237-8), but Craddock (1995: 104) 
has pointed out that some examples that are almost certainly meteoric 
in origin have no nickel in them at all. Small early pieces of iron could 
of course also easily have been the by-products of copper smelting (see 
Ogden 2000: 167). 

Why did the Egyptians take some three hundred years longer to adopt 
iron processing technology than their neighbours in the Near East? 
One very practical consideration might have been the fact that hafted 
hammers seem not to have been introduced into Egypt until the Late 


125 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Period - this would potentially have been fairly significant in terms of the 
development of Egyptian iron-working, since the process of hot-working 
iron would have been far less comfortable with unhafted hammers (see 
Ogden 2000: 168). 

The largest surviving set of iron artefacts that may perhaps date to 
the Achaemenid period in Egypt is a group of 23 wood-working tools 
excavated at Thebes by Petrie (1897: 18-19; 1909: 106). Petrie dated 
them to the 26th Dynasty, although some archaeologists have suggested 
that they are no earlier than the Ptolemaic period (4th to 1st century 
BC; see Williams and Maxwell-Hyslop 1976). It is unclear whether the 
mysterious lack of unhafted hammers is the only reason that can so far 
be suggested for Egypt’s reluctance (or inability) to convert to the brave 
new world of iron. In the meanwhile, we can only assume that there 
was some as yet unidentified trend of social or economic conservatism 
that acted as a disincentive to metallurgical innovation in Late Period 
Egypt. Edgerton (2008: 9), however, makes the point that the ‘failure’ of 
a society or group to accept and adopt a technological innovation should 
not be dismissed as mere conservatism: “The assumption that the new is 
clearly superior to what went before has an important corollary: failure 
to move from one to the other is to be explained by “conservatism”, 
not to mention stupidity or straightforward ignorance. “Resistance 
to technology” becomes a problem to be addressed by psychologists, 
sociologists, even historians. 

Thus, in reality, there seem to have been many situations in which 
societies, ancient or modern, have chosen to reject or ignore new 
technologies not because they distrusted their novelty but because there 
were no obvious discernible problems with the existing techniques or 
artefacts. Just because an innovation is known to exist does not mean 
that it will be automatically embraced, and a failure to embrace it can 
stem as much from pragmatism as from ‘conservatism’. 


126 


Technology embedded in urban 
society: finding the individual 
in the general 


How were we to translate mounds and concentrations of artifact 
debris into sociological phenomena? (Sanders et al. 1979: 16). 


This chapter addresses some of the questions relating to the social and 
economic context of technology in Egypt — in other words, the practical 
issues concerning the physical location of craftsmen, workshops and 
ateliers in ancient settlements. Where did they ply their trades and to what 
extent were they ‘self-employed’ or subject to state or temple control? 
The preceding chapters have discussed different areas of science and 
technology without directly tackling such problems as the identification 
of individual ancient Egyptian craft-workers and their households amid 
the great mass of surviving settlement data. This chapter therefore 
explores the ways in which Egyptian archaeological data can shed light 
on the pursuit of particular specialised crafts or professions. 

The varieties of lifestyles and occupations in New Kingdom Egypt 
feature in such Ramessid texts as Papyrus Boulaq 4 (Mariette 1871: pls 
15-28; Lichtheim 1976: 136-46) and Papyrus Lansing (Budge 1923; 
Blackman and Peet 1925). Part of the challenge of the material remains 
at ancient Egyptian settlement-sites such as Amarna, Memphis, Deir el- 
Ballas or Gurob is that of bringing to life the socio-economic abstractions 
of the New Kingdom texts through interpretation of the material debris 
of households and craft-workers. 


127 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


MEDITERRANEAN SEA 


LOWER EGYPT 


MIDDLE EGYPT 


UPPER EGYPT 


ef Mirgissa 


Deir El-Medina @ 
Medinet Habu ® 


Elephantine e / e Syene 
¢ Aswan 


Fig. 9.1. Map showing the location of Amarna. 


128 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


The city at Amarna as a laboratory for studying social 
integration of technology 


Despite a great deal of survey and excavation of New Kingdom 
settlements over the last few decades (e.g. Qantir: Pusch 1996, Deir 
el-Ballas: Lacovara 1990, Gurob: Shaw 2008, 2011), the Late Bronze 
Age city at Amarna (Figs 9.1 and 9.2) is our richest source for patterns 
of craftwork in New Kingdom Egyptian towns. It is possible to gain a 
superficial indication of the range and relative importance of activities 
across the city of Amarna as a whole (see the barchart in Fig. 9.3), but 
this kind of quantitative information can obviously be biased by many 
factors of preservation and archaeological visibility. It is not simply 
that certain activities may be altogether lost from the archaeological 
record but that some may, by their nature, leave more or less debris 
than others. It is therefore difficult to infer the relative importance of 
activities from barcharts recording quantities of objects, since the charts 
cannot be automatically ‘converted’ into ‘hours of work or ‘numbers of 
craftworkers’. A higher percentage of spinning and weaving artefacts 
in the North Suburb than in the North City can be fairly securely 
interpreted as an indication of a socio-economic difference between 
these two sectors of the Amarna community. However, a higher 
percentage of carpentry artefacts than leatherwork artefacts within the 
North City may indicate not so much more man-hours of carpentry as 
the simple fact that carpentry has left more traces than leatherwork in 
the archaeological record. 

The degree of preservation of different types of material remains 
can vary immensely even within a single Egyptian city such as the 
one at Amarna. For instance, the fact that the Amarna ‘workmen’s 
village’ is situated at a greater distance from the Nile, compared with 
the main city at Amarna, seems to have ensured that wood, matting 
and textiles were much better preserved in the village than in the 
city. Of course some parts of a large site may also be subject to more 
looting or early exploration than others; thus, in his preliminary 
description of the site, Borchardt (1907: 18) notes three zones of 
differing preservation in the central city and South Suburb. The 
western part of the city was said to be totally excavated by either 


129 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Vv‏ ما 


o ا ا‎ “ e 8 
ا‎ A Nort 1 to the roy 


necropolis. 
suburb 


e E 
.. Workmen's ` 
village 


' 
e, 


7 
Southern Zk E 


tombs ê 2 


Un 


Monta, . 


Fig. 9.2. Map of Amarna. 


130 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


Jewellery ا صم‎ 
Funerary | | 
Models 1 
Art 
Raw materials 
Writing & painting | 
Craftwork 
Food preparation 
| 
Measuring 
Hunting | 
Agriculture 


Gaming 


Labels/seals 
Rope/basketry 
dothing 


١ 
1 
sS 
eg 
> 
س‎ 
" 
1 
۱ 
۱ 
| 
| 

Toiletries 
a | 
1 

Storage N 
Furniture 
Fittings ۹ 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 

Percent of total assemblage 


Fig. 9.3. Profile of artefact types for the whole city at Amarna, based on a sample of 6000 
artefacts (proportion of jewellery = 48.3%). 


Petrie or the sebakhin (i.e. local farmers removing mud-brick remains 
for use as fertiliser), while a second zone to the east, was characterised 
by the total destruction of a few of the houses by sebakhbin. The third 
zone, where excavation was to concentrate from 1911 to 1925, was 
described as ‘almost entirely intact’. This eastern zone had the further 
advantage of being at the edge of the city, so that spoil could be 
dumped mainly over the uninhabited desert. 

When it is further considered that some crafts actually require 
more tools and leave greater amounts of débitage than others, then 
the inadequacy and complexity of the data become even more evident. 
The flow-chart in Table 9.1 shows how a typical set of 18th-Dynasty 
carpentry tools may be gradually diminished, in the archaeological 
record, by the various factors of preservation and inadequate excavation. 
As Kemp and Stevens (2010: 481) point out: ‘given how few metal tools 
were left behind at Amarna, wood-working is a largely invisible industry. 
Yet ... wooden furnishings, including shrines and coffins, were prestige 
objects, sometimes a destination for inlays in glass and faience, and so 
likely to have been manufactured within the city’. 


131 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Systemic context 18th-Dynasty carpenter's tool-kit (see Aldred 1954, 688) 
adze, axe, chisel, reamer, saw, bow-drill, mallet, awl, rubber 
Y 
Removal of valuable bronze and large wooden items at abandonment of site. 
Potential loss of adze, axe and saw blades and handles. 
¥ 


Archaeological context | Differential preservation of materials. 
Potential loss of wooden mallet and wooden handles of all other tools. 
Y 
Inadequate excavation. 


Potential loss of smaller items such as chisel and drill-head. 
Y 

Interpretive context Inadequate recording, e.g. misidentifications or failure to record certain 
items. 
Potential loss of rubber and adze-handle (perhaps misidentified as grind- 
stone and stick respectively). 
¥ 
Functional ambiguity, i.e. many carpenter's tools are easily confused with 
those of other crafts, e.g. awl (leather-working), chisel, drill and mallet 
(stone- and metal-working). 


Table 9.1. Flow-chart showing potential loss of objects as they pass from the systemic to 
interpretive contexts. 


Patterns of craftwork and professions at Amarna 


It is useful not only to ascertain the importance of a particular occupation 
relative to others practised within a single residential zone at Amarna, but 
also to see how this relative importance varies from one zone to another. 
It is, for instance, interesting to note that tools associated with craft- 
production constitute 31% of the total artefacts in the ‘South Suburb’ 
at Amarna, but it is considerably more significant to know that this 
percentage is much higher than that in the ‘workmen’s village’ (24.1%) 
or the ‘North City’ (23.9%). The numbers of craft tools from a single 
suburb or even a single house can only be properly assessed when they 
are compared both with the profiles in other parts of the city, and with 
the city as a whole. 

In the case of the group of houses labelled P47.1-3, at Amarna, the 
artefactual evidence is totally dominated by tools and products relating 
to sculpture, leading to the unequivocal identification of this complex 
as a ‘sculptors workshop’. In this instance we can supplement the 
archaeological evidence with a scene in the tomb of Huya (Amarna 
Rock-tomb no.1), high steward of Queen Tiye, at Amarna, in which 


132 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


Tuty, an overseer of sculptors, is shown at work in his studio (Davies 
1905: pl. XVID. 

Many houses at Amarna, however, have produced artefacts suggesting 
that a wide range of activities was being conducted, perhaps by different 
members of the household. The problem of interpreting such assemblages 
shows the potential gap between the simplistic world of textual labels 
and idealised images, and the complexity of the real world as presented 
in the form of archaeological remains (see, for instance, Eyre 1995). A 
few other houses in the north and south suburbs are also identifiable 
as workshops. House 049.14 is probably another sculptors residence; 
Q46.23 was evidently occupied by a coppersmith; Q47.2 by a bead-maker; 
U35.2 by a painter and Q47.3 by a cobbler. The evidence, however, derives 
primarily from the interiors of houses (since these were the main target 
of pre-1970s excavators at the site), whereas the evidence of current and 
recent excavations confirms that much of the craftwork actually took place 
in courtyards and open areas (Stevens and Eccleston 2007: 153). 

A group of houses (P49.3-6) were excavated by Ludwig Borchardt 
in his 1912 season at Amarna. The arrangement of these buildings, 
around a central courtyard, suggests that they may have constituted a 
workshop of some kind; it is clear, however, that the courtyard, covered 
in a surface scatter of basalt chips, was not excavated at all by Borchardt. 
More recent excavation at Amarna has focused on complete areas of 
housing and surrounding spaces, thus exploring such neglected open 
areas and beginning to provide a great deal more evidence concerning 
the plying of trades in and around individual houses at Amarna (see 
Kemp 1995: 1-168). It is also not clear whether it is correct to identify 
all the excavated domestic structures as ‘houses’, when in fact many 
might be better described as ‘workshops’ or ‘ateliers’; Kemp and Stevens 
(2010: 493) remark, Really, the question is how fixed was the boundary 
between residential space and workplace in ancient Egypt; the answer 
being probably, not very. 


Textual sources 


Another complicating factor, whether for visual or archaeological evidence, 
is our uncertainty as to whether ‘private’ patronage of professional 
craftsmen was a peripheral or dominant feature of the Egyptian 


13 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


economy. Similarly, it is difficult to tell whether the majority of skilled 
craftsmen plied their trades as private individuals in their own houses, or 
whether they were generally employed together in large state-controlled 
(or temple-controlled) workshops. Recent evidence probably suggesting 
a degree of private enterprise in the field of carpentry is provided by a 
group of ostraca from Deir el]-Medina that are marked with illustrations 
of furniture types (furniture ostraca’), and evidently constitute a detailed 
communication system whereby business transactions were drawn up 
showing the objects of the transaction and either the producer or the 
recipient, or perhaps both’ (Killen and Weiss 2009: 140). The most 
detailed of these ostraca (O. Florence 2628) consists of concise depictions 
of several pieces of furniture, each associated with a sign probably 
representing either the carpenter or customer/recipient relating to that 
object (Killen and Weiss 2009: 141, 145). Using these kind of data for 
funerary equipment, along with other documents, Cooney (2006; 2007) 
has been able to reconstruct, for the very specialised royal workmen at 
Deir el-Medina at least, some sense of the ‘formal workshop’, in which 
the craftsmen are employed by the state to work on aspects of the royal 
tomb, and the ‘informal workshop’ which comprises tasks undertaken by 
loose groups of workers for private individuals. This distinction between 
different workshops, however, must be seen in the context of the state 
ownership of many of the craftsmen’s valuable tools (for example O. Cairo 
25509, for which see McDowell 1999: 209-10), which would almost 
certainly have meant that “informal commissions were tolerated by the 
state, since tools would often have needed to be made available for these 
non-royal purposes. This suggests an interesting socio-economic situation 
in the Ramessid period, in which craftsmen were perhaps officially allowed 
to work both to royal and private patronage, but of course our principal 
information derives from the highly artificial and perhaps unusually 
state-dominated Deir el]-Medina community. As Haring (2009: 6) points 
out, ‘It is unlikely, however, that craftsmanship was only institutional: 
archaeological and ethnological research suggests industry, seasonal or 
permanent, in peasant households and local workshops.’ 

When Eric Peet and Leonard Woolley were excavating parts of the 
city at Amarna in the early 1920s, they concluded that within the 
main area of the city there is ... no evidence of the grouping of people 
of various classes or trades in different quarters of the town. High- 


134 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


Priest rubs shoulders with leatherworker, and Vizier with glass-maker’ 
(Peet and Woolley 1923, 1-2). This rather intuitive quote not only 
suggests (incorrectly as it turns out, see Shaw 1996) that the grouping 
of houses of professionals and craftsmen at Amarna is largely random 
and unsystematic, but also indirectly raises the question of whether 
individuals in the city at Amarna, and other New Kingdom communities, 
can actually be identified socially by one specific skill or craft, or whether 
there were high degrees of multi-tasking by individuals (the ancient 
equivalents of ‘portfolio’ workers). 

Several New Kingdom textual sources, mainly deriving from western 
Thebes, have the potential to shed light on the archaeological picture 
concerning trades and occupations. These sources may be divided into 
two basic types: (1) self-conscious literary and scribal documents, which 
can be used to explore the ancient Egyptians’ own views on different 
trades and professions, and (2) administrative or legal records of specific 
individual accounts or administrative arrangements, which give some idea 
of the ways in which the population were divided up into different types 
of workers. It is the latter category that has the greatest potential from the 
point of view of identifying the degree to which particular craftworkers’ 
houses were grouped together. There are two administrative documents 
that are particularly relevant to this kind of analysis of craftsmen and 
professions: the Wilbour Papyrus (Gardiner and Faulkner 1941-52) and 
Papyrus BM 10068 (Peet 1930: 83-102). 

The Wilbour Papyrus, an administrative document dating to year 4 
of Ramesses V (<c. 1152 BO), lists (for the purpose of assessing tax’) a 
large number of plots of land in Middle Egypt. Each plot is described in 
terms of its size, calculated yield, the name of the priest or official who 
owns or administers it, the name of the nearest settlement and the name 
and occupation of the cultivator. O’Connor (1972) used this source to 
plot the Middle Egyptian late New Kingdom patterns of settlements and 
occupation types. He distinguishes between zones with greater and lesser 
emphasis on agriculture and points out that different settlements have 
different proportions of the major types of ‘occupation’ listed: cultivator, 
priest, lady, herdsman, scribe, stable-master, soldier and Sherden’ (east 
Mediterranean immigrant, see Fig. 8.4 above). The other potentially 
relevant administrative document is Papyrus BM 10068, one of a group 
of twelve “Tomb Robbery Papyri recording judicial inquiries at Thebes 


135 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


and dating to the 16th and 17th years of Ramesses IX (c. 1115 BC). The 
recto of P BM 10068 is inscribed with a list of tomb robbers and stolen 
goods, while its verso comprises a list of 182 households, described as 
the ‘town register of the West of No from the temple of King Menmaare 
to the settlement of Maiunehes’. Like the Wilbour Papyrus, P BM 
10068 lists the names and occupations of a series of individuals (for 
two different analyses of the list and its social implications, see Janssen 
1992 and Shaw 2004). Peet suggests that the listed houses lay in a line 
between the temples of Seti I, Ramesses II and Ramesses III and then 
turned west towards the contemporary village of Deir el]-Medina. 

Both P. Wilbour and P BM 10068 provide an indication of the relative 
importance of particular professions and trades (see Table 9.2). However, 
the high percentage of soldiers in P Wilbour (43.7% according to Katary 
1983) undoubtedly results from the nature of the document, since many 
military personnel would have been rewarded with plots of land. The 
high percentage of priests in P. BM 10068 (28%) must also be somewhat 
unrealistic, since, as Peet (1930: 84) cautions: “it is important not to lose 
sight of the very artificial composition of the population of the West 
of Thebes, where there was probably little business carried on except 
in connection with the long line of funerary temples of the kings and 
the Necropolis’. On the other hand, the combination of both papyri 
provides an idea of the way in which urban populations might have been 


Professions % Professions % 


Priests 1 Herdsmen 10.0 
Scribes 1 Fishermen 7.0 
Medjay (police) ٤ Coppersmiths 5.0 
Administrators . Gardeners 4.0 
Sandal-makers د‎ Chief stablemen 3.0 
Washermen : `Land-workers’ 3.0 
Beekeepers Brewers 2.0 
Attendants Potters 2.0 
Storemen Porters 1.0 
Incense roasters . Woodcutters 1.0 
Doctors : Chief workmen 0.6 
Guards 1 Goldworkers 0.6 
Gilders Measurers 0.6 


Makers of ‘w3t swi’ 


Table 9.2. Table listing the percentages of different occupations mentioned in Papyrus 
BM 10068. 


136 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


dominated by priests, soldiers, scribes and administrative officials — this 
equates with the evidence of the inscribed door-jambs and lintels of 
some of the largest houses at Amarna (Murnane 1995: 126, 130, 141-3, 
166-8), since the titles of these wealthy householders imply that they 
would usually have been in charge of entourages of members of these 
four professions. 

P. BM 10068 also includes many other occupations, of which the 
most numerous are gardeners, herdsmen, fishermen, coppersmiths and 
sandal-makers. Perhaps the most notable aspect of the lists is that they 
confirm the fact that such trades were actually considered to be full- 
time professions. Beekeepers, brewers and gilders are relatively familiar 
categories of tradesmen, but the text certainly implies that ‘incense 
roasters’ and ‘“measurers’ were also perhaps regarded as full-time workers 
in the New Kingdom. Many of the types of occupation listed in PD. BM 
10068 might have left no trace in the archaeological record at Amarna, 
e.g. porter, guard, attendant or storeman. 

It is possible that P2 BM 10068 lists the households in their actual 
topographical order — if this is the case, it would be possible to gain a 
text-based idea of the patterning of different trades within this particular 
community. If the document is a true reflection of the patterning within 
the community — despite the fact that it seems inherently unlikely for 
the settlement to have been strung out in a long row as the list-form 
would suggest — the different professions and ranks appear to be mixed 
together rather than separated into specialised zones. On the other hand, 
the distinctive ‘neighbourhoods’ identified archaeologically at Amarna 
(see Shaw 1996: 98-100 and Kemp and Stevens 2010: 473-516) may be 
echoed to some extent in occasional small groups of the same type of 
trade spread among the other types. It is to be expected, in an evidently 
temple-based community, that priests might group together (particularly 
in the immediate vicinity of the three main royal mortuary temples of 
the late Ramessid period), but there are also a few concentrations of other 
trades, in groups of up to five in a row (such as fishermen, herdsmen 
and sandal-makers). Most of the ‘land workers’ are concentrated at the 
southwestern tip of the settlement. There are also occasional pairs of 
the same profession, such as coppersmiths, scribes and brewers. Other 
occupations, however, are spread relatively evenly throughout the list. 

A number of conclusions can be drawn from the above discussion of 


137 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


visual, textual and archaeological evidence for the practising of different 
trades and crafts. First, it is often very difficult to reconcile textual and 
archaeological data concerning crafts and professions. Secondly, many 
publications discussing New Kingdom villages, towns and cities present 
only part of the picture, since streets, courtyards and ‘empty’ public 
spaces have tended not to be excavated in the past —~ Kemp and Stevens 
(2010: 495) have demonstrated eloquently, with their work on the ‘grid 
12’ group of houses in the South Suburb at Amarna, that ‘the debris of 
manufacture can occur indiscriminately across residential space and craft 
areas alike’. Thirdly, the evidence from individual households at Amarna 
suggests that most households contained various individuals plying a 
diverse range of crafts rather than simply indicating the principal ‘job’ of 
the head of the household. 

This situation is often even more complicated when we consider the 
very large villas at Amarna, where both family members and servants 
would be plying different trades, and in addition surrounding small 
households (perhaps linked to the large ones by the need to obtain water 
and grain) probably have to be treated as extensions to the major ‘nuclear’ 
house. In other words, our pursuit of the houses of individual craftsmen 
and professionals is complicated by the fact that no working person in 
an urban context can be examined independently of the community 
within which he or she is working. Each urban household must be 
interpreted in terms of networks of production and consumption both 
on neighbourhood and city-wide levels. 


Seeking the individual in the archaeological record 


Janssen (1975: 159) suggested thirty-five years ago that ‘the most 
comprehensive question seems to be whether there existed during the 
New Kingdom a class of free craftsmen working for a free market or not’, 
although it might be argued that it is inappropriate to attempt to apply the 
definitions and terminology of such modern researchers as economists, 
sociologists and geographers to the study of ancient material culture. The 
profile of wealth-levels at Amarna, based on the architectural attributes 
and diversity of occupations indicated by artefactual frequencies, adds 
up to a picture of New Kingdom society in which individuals can be 
seen to be competing at different economic levels. Such competition 


138 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


however might exist in a redistributive economy, a free-trade economy or 
indeed a combination of the two, such as Cooney (2006) hypothesises. 
One possible strong archaeological indication of free trade might be the 
existence of open spaces identifiable as market areas (Kemp 1972: 674; 
Gledhill and Larssen 1982: 203-4), but even then there are alternative 
explanations for the space, such as official rationing processes (Kemp 
1984: 60-80, for a description of the zir-area in the Workmen’s Village) 
or large-scale refuse deposition. 

It becomes quickly apparent that a socio-economic question, which 
is framed, as Janssen’s is, in the abstract terms of modern economics, is 
not necessarily directly answerable through material remains. Excavators 
in the Basin of Mexico, confronted by the same basic dilemma, have 
asked: How were we to translate mounds and concentrations of artifact 
debris into sociological phenomena? (Sanders et al. 1979: 16). Tietze 
(1986), discussing theories of the Egyptian economy put forward by 
Helck (1975), Morentz (1969) and Janssen (1975), suggests that the 
element lacking in all three models is a sense of the microcosm of 
daily transactions between individuals: the ‘Alltag der ãgyptischen 
Wirtschaft, der auf der Versorgung einer nach Millionen Zahlenden 
Bevolkerung beruhte’ (Tietze 1986: 56). His detailed examination of 
architectural differentiation was intended to fill this gap and to give 
a sense of the economic structure of a specific New Kingdom city, 
in order to flesh out the generalisations of economic theory. He was 
therefore dealing with the same confrontation between, on the one 
hand, the essentially ‘anecdotal and site-specific data and, on the 
other hand, statements about the general mechanisms that may have 
produced and moulded the data. 

The Mesoamerican archaeologist, George Cowgill, working with 
a huge database of artefacts from the Classic Maya urban site of 
Teotihuacan (300-500 AD), discusses at great length the problems 
of moving from the archaeological material itself (whether presented 
in the form of contour plans, tables or barcharts) to actual dynamic 
theories of political and economic organisation (Cowgill 1974; 1984). 
He describes the recurrent problem of the great gap between data and 
theory, concluding that the two can rarely be said to coincide in a 
definite and unambiguous way. 


139 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Spatial analysis at Amarna: converting artefacts into 
behavioural data 


In this case-study, the first step in the conversion of Amarna artefactual 
patterns into socio-economic data is the collation of particular types 
of artefacts into general behavioural categories. This process makes the 
mass of statistics easier to handle and to evaluate. Table 9.3 lists the 
percentages of the 27 categories into which over 350+ types of artefact 
are collated. The 27 categories include aspects of the environment of 
the Amarna population, such as furniture’ and ‘clothing’, as well as 
the activities which took place in the houses and courtyards, such as 
‘carpentry’ and ‘spinning/weaving;. 

The urban activities at Amarna can therefore be divided into the broad 
areas of environment, subsistence, craftwork and products, excluding 
the categories of ‘unidentified’ and ‘post-Amarna period artefacts. 
The arrangement is almost cyclical in the sense that all of the items 
making up the basic static environment of the household are also, at 
the same time, products of the craftwork activities. Similar strategies 
of ‘artefactual collation’ have been employed by Nicholas (1981) and 
Tosi (1984). Nicholas’s analysis of the artefactual material from a suburb 
of Tel el-Malyan in Iran assigns each find to a ‘broad functional class 
of activity’ and then constructs a ‘functional profile’ for each of three 
Banesh building levels in the suburb. Tosi, working with material from 
four sites in the Turanian basin (mainly eastern Iran), attempts to assess 
the ‘variability in the spatial allocation of craft production’ (Tosi 1984: 
29). He analyses this database, within a Marxist theoretical framework, 
by collating artefacts with groups of particular ‘archaeological indicators’ 
that essentially correspond to Nicholas’s functional classes’. 


Environment Subsistence Craftwork Products 
Fittings Agriculture General tools Art 

Furniture Hunting Spinning/weaving Funerary items 
Storage Measuring Stone-working Models 
Clothing Food remains Carpentry Jewellery 
Rope/ basketry Food preparation Metal-working 

Labels/seals Leather-working 

Toiletries Writing/painting 

Gaming Raw materials 


Table 9.3. The functional arrangement of Amarna artefactual categories into a system. 


140 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


Fig. 9.3 (p. 131) is a barchart representing the profile of behaviour for 
a sample of approximately 6000 non-ceramic artefacts from a large variety 
of parts of the city at Amarna. Three particular types of material in the 
barcharts (fittings, jewellery and raw materials) pose several problems. 
The proportions of both raw material and jewellery are particularly 
susceptible to distortion by the pre-1979 excavation strategies at Amarna 
(see Shaw 2000 for discussion of the issues presented by this kind of 
archaeological distortion). These two categories of material account 
for the largest proportion of material discarded in the spoil heaps of 
Eric Peet and Leonard Woolley at the Workmen’s Village (Peet and 
Woolley 1923), and of John Pendlebury in the North City (Pendlebury 
1931: 240-2; 1932: 143-5). The greater proportion of raw materials 
and jewellery from deposits excavated by Barry Kemp since 1979 has 
the effect of artificially diminishing the proportions of other activities. 
This is something that simply has to be borne in mind when comparing 
the pre-1979 artefactual data with more modern material from the 
Workmen’s Village. 

It should also be noted that elements of jewellery, such as beads, rings 
and amulets, are so prolific at Amarna (and at most other settlements 
throughout the New Kingdom) that they invariably constitute a very 
high proportion of the non-ceramic artefactual record. Fittings are 
included in the barcharts in Figs 9.3 and 9.5-9.6, but they should 
be treated with caution since the proportions probably derive from 
differences in excavators’ recording techniques rather than the nature of 
the archaeological record itself. 

During the compilation of the 6000-artefact sample that forms 
the basis for the various tables and charts in this chapter, it became 
increasingly obvious that the records of the various excavators at Amarna 
differ radically in their attention to those aspects of the material remains 
that lie midway between the spheres of ‘architecture’ and ‘artefact’. 
Certain architectural features, such as column-bases and wall-plaster are 
consistently recorded as artefacts in the current excavations at Amarna 
(see Kemp’s treatment of a window-frame from the Workmen’s Village: 
Kemp 1986: 11-14). Previous excavations at the site have however been 
somewhat erratic in their recording of such quasi-architectural material. 
Ludwig Borchardt’s plans, for instance, often show column-bases that 
are not mentioned in the find-lists. Those fittings that do appear in the 


141 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


find-lists of the old excavations would therefore almost certainly present 
a misleading picture. 

The interpretation of Amarna artefactual data is also complicated by 
the problem of determining the relative importance of assemblages or 
activities at a household. Textual evidence indicates the existence of many 
skilled workers, such as sculptors (gnwtyw or snbyw), metal-workers 
(bistyw) or butchers (stfw), but the archaeological evidence from each 
household suggests that any one individual might have practised a wide 
range of types of craftwork. How then is the archaeologist to identify 
the specific aspect of the assemblage that the individual would have 
thought of as his trade’ or speciality? In P BM 10068 (Peet 1930: 95-7; 
Janssen 1992; Shaw 2004: 19-20) two priests are also described as being 
coppersmiths. Kemp (1981: 86) points out that, ‘in trying to envisage 
the uses of various parts of the houses and estates at Tell el]-Amarna we 
should not be inhibited by too modern a view of life, which tends to 
separate work from domesticity. The house of the sculptor [P47.2, i.e. 
Thutmose’s house], unusual in its finds but not in its design, should be 
a constant reminder of how varied and numerous may have been the 
activities in and around these houses.’ 


The South Suburb (or ‘main city”) at Amarna 


The large area of housing that lies south of the public and ceremonial 
buildings of the central city at Amarna has been excavated and analysed 
by many different archaeologists; it has variously been described as the 
‘South Suburb’ and the ‘main city’. Petrie’s small sample of domestic 
buildings, excavated in 1891-2, were all in the South Suburb. These 
houses, however, only provided a glimpse of the basic Amarna repertoire 
of architectural and artefactual types. It was the work of Borchardt (in 
1907 and 1911-14) that revealed the full richness and complexity of the 
South Suburb. The German excavations uncovered the largest area of 
the southern zone of housing, and this excavated zone was extended 
to north and west by the subsequent work of British excavators from 
1921 to 1937 (see, for instance, Peet and Woolley 1923: 1-50). Judging 
from such dating criteria as ostraca and jewellery (bearing year-dates 
and cartouches respectively), the South Suburb seems to have been 
the earliest residential part of the city. Kemp (1981: 88) also suggests 


142 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


that the alignment of various South Suburb houses with the main road 
through the central city is an indication of their relatively early date 
of construction. The number of houses in the entire South Suburb 
(including unexcavated areas) was about 2400, covering an area of over 
1.5km’. Janssen (1983: 286) suggests that the ‘southern zone’ housed 
between 35,000 and 45,000 people, and that this was probably over half 
of the city’s population, while Kemp (1981: 96) suggests a lower figure 
of about 16,000-25,000 individuals. 

Both architecturally and artefactually, the South Suburb appears to 
have been a kind of average blend of households, perhaps constituting 
the original nucleus of the city. The remainder of this chapter comprises 
a study of four different neighbourhoods of the South Suburb: (1) 
gridsquare 049, which comprises four large houses surrounded by 
thirteen smaller buildings; (2) a tight block of nine small houses in 
the southeastern corner of gridsquare P46; (3) two very large houses in 
gridsquare R44 (belonging to a ‘steward’ and a high priest); and (4) a 
pair of houses (O047.16a and 047.20) identified as a sculptor’s residence 
or atelier. These four neighbourhoods are widely spread out across the 
suburb and they were chosen to represent a range of South Suburb 
households primarily on the basis of architectural differences. Only the 
artefacts from the houses in gridsquare O49 have been published in full 
(Borchardt and Ricke 1980, Peet and Woolley 1923). The P46 houses 
were excavated by Newton in October 1923; R44.1-2 were excavated by 
Griffith in January 1924; and 047.16a and .20 by Waddington in January 
1933 (all of the data for these derive from unpublished notebooks in the 
archives of the Egypt Exploration Society, London). It is not easy to 
assess whether this sample is actually typical, but it can at least be shown 
(see Fig. 9.4 below) that the architectural range in gridsquare O49 is very 
similar to that of the South Suburb as a whole, while the combination of 
the other three sections of the sample constitutes a similar (if not quite 
so even) architectural range. 

Kemp points out that gridsquares 049, Q46 and Q47 (all excavated by 
Borchardt in the early 1900s) are particularly important from the point 
of view of the relationships between large and small houses in that ‘the 
existence of interrelated housing groups is made most evident from the 
eastern margins of the city, where building petered out before maximum 
density was reached (Kemp 1981: 92). Fig. 9.6 shows the percentages of 


143 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


45 


40 

35 

30 

25 7 B= Main City 
South Suburb 
=o49 

20 7 
=P46 

15 7 

. | | 

| | 

04 1 1 1 mm mm 1 a 1 

<50 <100 < 150 <20 


< 250 < 300 < 350 < 400 < 450 < S00 


Fig. 9.4. Profile of house-sizes for O49 and P46, two different sectors of the South Suburb at 
Amarna. 


different activities in the aggregate of artefacts from the South Suburb 
as a whole. 

A comparison of the barchart for the South Suburb (Fig. 9.5) with 
that for the whole city (Fig. 9.3) is probably the best starting point for 
a discussion of the character of the South Suburb itself. There are a few 
activities in which the South Suburb seems relatively lacking — furniture, 
toiletries, basketry and agriculture — but generally it echoes the character 
of the city as a whole in that the same range of activities is present in 
roughly the same proportions. The most obvious aspect of the South 
Suburb barchart is the large quantity and variety of craftwork practised. 
At 17%, the proportion of craftwork is higher than in any other part of 
the site, justifying Fairman’s description of this zone as the “industrial 
centre’ (Fairman 1949: 37). The percentages of art (paintings and 
sculptures), writing and painting are also much higher than elsewhere. 
These proportions present a picture of a sector of the population that 
was, on average, more literate, more productive and more likely to possess 
items of sculpture. An important aspect of the South Suburb, however, 
is its great internal diversity: the architectural evidence shows that the 
population of the suburb embraced both the highest and lowest levels 


144 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 
yeweliery- 
1 
۳ 
ی‎ 
اڪ ڪڪ‎ 
سے‎ 


Funerary 
Models 

Art 

Raw materials 


Writing & painting 


Craftwork 
Food preparation 1. 
Food ویڪ‎ 
Measuring El 
Hunting Jl 
Agriculture 
Gaming 3 
Toiletries 
Labels/seals ۹ 
Rope/basketry 
Clothing ٣ 
Storage سڪ‎ 
ګ‎ 
u 


Furniture 


Fittings 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 


Percent of total assemblage 


Fig. 9.5. Profile of artefact types in the South Suburb at Amarna. 


of the Amarna economy, from the mansions of the high priests Pawah 
and Panehsy to the cramped houses of anonymous leather-workers and 
potters. 

Fig. 9.6 compares the architecturally poorer households of gridsquare 
P46 with the mixture of rich and poor in gridsquare 049. The difference 
between the two must partially be a result ofthe sample-sizes (500 artefacts 
from O49 compared with only 64 from P46), particularly with regard to 
the lack of activities within the spheres of ‘domestic environment’ and 
‘subsistence’ which are usually present in small numbers throughout the 
city. However, the relative proportions of types of craftwork and products 
are more telling. Both 049 and P46 have a high proportion of craftwork 
(23% and 25.1% respectively), but whereas in O49 the evidence of 
craftwork is spread evenly across a range of activities including spinning 
and weaving, faience-production, leather-working, sculpting and metal- 


145 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


Jewellery j 


Funerary 
Models 

Art 

Raw materials 


Writing & painting 


Food preparation 
Food 

Measuring P46 
Hunting jf = 049 
Agriculture 
Gaming 
Toiletries 
Labels/seals 


Rope/basketry 


Clothing 


" 

و 

Samaeer 

ا هه ج 
Craftwork‏ 

- 

1 

em 

am 

- 

eg 

mY 

mm 

E 


Storage j 


Furniture 


Fittings 


0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 


Fig. 9.6. Profile of artefact types in O49 and P46, two different sectors of the South Suburb at 
Amarna. 


working, the P46 craft debris is largely dominated by evidence of faience 
production, which comprises 18.8% of the total artefactual assemblage 
from P46. 

The total lack of evidence of artefacts relating to writing and painting 
in P46 houses contrasts sharply with a percentage of 8.4% in O49. If 
the poor families of P46 were illiterate, they were by no means alone 
in this, for the barchart showing evidence of writing across the city as 
a whole (Fig. 9.7) indicates that it is gridsquare 049 that is relatively 
unusual in having such a high proportion of artefacts relating to literacy. 
The lack of writing among the P46 households must undoubtedly have 
been the norm. It is surprising, however, to note that they possessed 
a considerably higher proportion of artistic products (7.8%) than any 
residential area outside the South Suburb (apart from the so-called 
‘palace servants’ quarters”). Since the craft tools from P46 include none 
of the metal-, stone- or wood-working implements that usually indicate 
the presence of sculptors, it seems likely that the art in P46 houses was 
actually owned rather than being produced for others (as in such ateliers 


as 049.14 and 047.16a-20). 
146 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


Gridsquare P46 
Gridsquare 049 
Palace Servants 
Workmen's Village 
North City 


North Suburb 


South Suburb 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 


Percentage of assemblage comprising evidence for writing or 
painting 


Fig. 9.7. Proportions of writing and painting artefacts in different parts of the city at Amarna. 


T'he 1987 excavations in the main city at Amarna (Kemp 1988) confirm 
the importance of figurative art throughout the whole of the South 
Suburb, with finds of female figurines from the debris of a pottery and 
glaze ‘factory’ in the courtyard of building Q48.4. Figurines at Amarna 
must have been essential to the domestic cults centred around such 
deities as Bes and Taweret, who were associated with childbirth and the 
security of the family (Kemp 1979, Pinch 1983). Large scale stone and 
wood statuary, on the other hand, were much more closely associated 
with the richer houses, where the courtyards or gardens often contained 
shrines, incorporating sculptures and stelae, dedicated to the official god, 
Aten, and to the royal family. The excavations of New Kingdom houses 
at Memphis (Giddy 1999) have revealed similarly high proportions of 
figurines (6.9% of the total artefacts), showing that the phenomenon 
extends well beyond the confines of Amarna. 

The barchart of activities at P46 probably also presents a view of 
the South Suburb pared down to the most basic parameters of life. As 
far as subsistence is concerned, there are only a few flint tools but no 
indication of food or cooking implements. Compared with the Amarna 
Workmen’s Village, for instance, the inhabitants of the small housing 
block of P46 seem to have been much more reliant on other sections of 
the community; this interdependence is a clue to the nature of the South 
Suburb as a whole. 

In some ways the statistical breakdown of types of activity in the South 
Suburb and the Workmen’s Village contradicts the traditional view of 
these two zones. Usually the Workmen’s Village is characterised as an 


147 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


isolated outpost only surviving through its dependency on the main city, 
as opposed to the thriving ‘industrial community in the southern part of 
the city. The South Suburb as a whole is certainly as self-sufficient as any 
other part of Amarna: the artefactual evidence indicates a strong cycle of 
localised production and consumption, against a background of higher 
proportions of domestic and food-related artefacts than in the North 
Suburb or North City. The great difference between the South Suburb 
and the Workmen’s Village, however, is that the South Suburb is split up 
into many smaller units, such as neighbourhoods or single households, 
which are much more specialised than either the Village as a whole or 
even individual houses within the Village. 

The patterning of the artefacts in the South Suburb indicates that 
a group of poor households, such as those in P46 might have devoted 
themselves to large amounts of faience production, while relying on 
other households to provide them with basic necessities. Kemp and 
Stevens (2010: 496) seem to reach a similar conclusion with regard to 
faience production, on the basis of their detailed excavation of ‘grid 12’ in 
the South Suburb: ‘Certainly there is little obvious sign of state imprint on 
the organisation of manufacturing facilities for faience’. Similarly, in the 
sculptor’s atelier 047.16a-20 there is a high proportion of artefacts relating 
to sculpture (metal-working, stone-working and miscellaneous tools 
comprising 7.8% of the total assemblage) but relatively low proportions 
of artefacts relating to subsistence (1.9%) and faience production (1.9%). 


Conclusions and discussion 


If the patterning of artefacts in the South Suburb at Amarna is a true 
expression of the Egyptian New Kingdom economic system, then the 
emphasis is on the interdependence of specialists, exchanging goods and 
services among themselves, rather than the still commonly held view of 
a homogeneous mass of workers sustained by an apparatus of temple and 
state redistribution (Janssen 1975; 1983). Undoubtedly there was a large 
amount of work done for the state alone — such pictorial evidence as the 
paintings in the 18th-dynasty tomb of Rekhmira at Thebes (Davies 1943) 
appear to show large groups of craftsmen employed in royal workshops — 
but the inhabitants of cities such as Amarna and Memphis were probably 
also involved in production for private consumption. 


148 


9. Technology embedded in urban society 


The patterning of houses and objects in the South Suburb shows 
an intricate patchwork of production and consumption, involving 
individual families and neighbourhoods specialising in particular forms 
of manufacture. Such houses as 047.16a-20 and P47.1-3 seem oriented 
towards more large-scale production (for royal or priestly patrons) but in 
most of the households of the South Suburb the artefacts suggest small- 
scale domestic production that can only have realistically functioned 
within a tight interdependent network of families, supplying one 
another’s needs from carpentry to spinning and weaving. It is possible 
(but difficult to prove from the archaeological record alone) that 
specialists at this lowest level of production could have been compelled 
to hand over their products (whether textiles or furniture) in return 
for state rations. Kemp and Stevens (2010: 499) argue that the overall 
socio-economic situation at Amarna is one involving ‘an intricate balance 
between the communal and the individualistic that varied all the time 
from one small part of the site to another’. Clearly there was, to some 
degree, a spectrum of economic possibilities, from the relatively tight 
state control and provisioning of the Workmen’s Village to the looser 
scenarios in different neighbourhoods of the South Suburb, where some 
households may have enjoyed a degree of relative autonomy. 

Both Kemp’s analyses of granaries across Amarna as a whole (Kemp 
1972: 670-72; Kemp 1986), and Christian Tietze’s study of Amarna 
architecture (Tietze 1986) suggest that the smaller households may 
have supplied labour and finished products to the inhabitants of wealthy 
houses (such as 049.1 and R44.1) in return for supplies of grain. Such a 
situation is borne out by the tendency of smaller houses to cluster around 
the perimeters of large houses’ courtyards. This single redistributive 
facet of the economy of the South Suburb is understandable, given the 
fact that the average inhabitant of Amarna would have been unable to 
grow enough food locally to survive. Only the richer members of the 
community could have had the resources to grow crops on the western 
side of the river, transport the produce across the river, and store it in 
large silos. Textual evidence shows that the wealthy occupants of the 
cities of the New Kingdom probably also owned country-estates (bbnuw) 
which would have helped to fuel the urban economy (O Connor 1972: 
693-5). 

James (1985: 201) points out that ‘the craftsmen shown in Rekhmira’s 


149 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


tomb are, as should be expected, working on royal commissions, but 
many are engaged in simple activities that are not seen to be concerned 
necessarily with the manufacture of specifically royal objects’. This 
modified view of Egyptian urban society in the Late Bronze Age, as a 
socio-economic system in which ‘state employees’ might co-exist with 
large numbers of specialists working both for the state and for themselves, 
has been long argued by Smith (1972: 710-11) and Kemp (1972; 1977; 
1986), and has more recently been argued — primarily on the basis of 
Theban textual data - by Cooney (2006, 2007). The archaeological data 
discussed above, with regard to the South Suburb, suggest that this 
scenario is still the most convincing. 


150 


10 


Conclusions 


We will sometimes use the word technosocial to direct attention 
to the mutual interpenetration of technology and society. We want 
to highlight how technology affects social relationships, how social 
relationships affect technology, and how this changes over time and 
place (Bauchspies, Croissant and Restivo 2006: 9). 


As the preface to this book has already indicated, the coverage of ancient 
Egyptian materials, technologies and innovations here could not hope to 
be all-embracing (see Nicholson and Shaw 2000 for at least an attempt 
at such comprehensiveness, although even this work omits numerous 
areas of technology, such as boat-building, hydrology, sculpture, stone 
masonry, painting, mining etc.). Instead, I have focused on case-studies 
that can provide certain insights into the various ways in which the 
material culture of the pharaonic period was moulded, formed, and 
propelled in certain directions by diverse human, environmental, social 
and historical factors. Just as Kubler (1962: 1) argues that ‘man’s native 
inertia is overcome only by desire, and nothing gets made unless it is 
desirable’, so studies of innovation and transmission of material culture 
in the Nile valley suggest that the ancient Egyptians were no more or 
less guilty of inherent conservatism than any other Bronze Age cultures 
in north Africa and the Near East. Not all Egyptian technological 
choices were necessarily optimal (in modern terms), but the case-studies 
discussed in each of the chapters above demonstrate that, within their 
own cultural and economic contexts, these decisions are usually at least 
clearly explicable. 


151 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


General mechanisms of innovation 


Rogers (1983) outlines a sequence of stages by which innovations diffused 
via such phases as knowledge, persuasion, implementation etc., and also 
various factors that were considered to accelerate or retard the process 
by which an innovation might spread through a culture or from one 
culture to another. Whether the detail of such a process can be regarded 
as genuinely applicable to ancient cultures — as Shortland (2004: 5-8) 
has argued — or whether it in fact derives too much of its essentials from 
relatively modern cultural scenarios, it nevertheless indicates, as some of 
the chapters above have attempted to do, that the process of adopting or 
evolving a new form of technology is rarely straightforward or simple. 
Boyd and Richerson (1985) demonstrate just how complex processes 
of transmission of cultural phenomena can be: they analyse a number 
of ethnographic situations in which groups of people have either (1) 
opted to maintain particular cultural traditions, artefacts, and materials, 
or (2) adopted new ones, perhaps specifically because they see some 
local advantage (even if that advantage is not inherent in the ‘original’ 
nature or use of the cultural phenonomen in question). They distinguish 
between a number of different forms of cultural transmission, arguing 
that something like the adoption of the snowmobile by the Cree 
people of northern Canada, in place of the snowshoe, is an example 
of ‘directly biased transmission’, which can be regarded as a situation 
in which human decision-making acts as a form of natural selection 
on cultural attributes. Boyd and Richerson, however, also outline the 
situation in which two individuals within a specific group tend to have 
far more cultural similarities than two individuals that each belong to 
quite ethnically or geographical distinct populations — this they define 
as ‘conformist tradition’, i.e. in this scenario, people tend to conform 
culturally with their immediate surroundings. It is not necessary to gO 
into the full detail of this application of evolutionary ideas to processes of 
cultural change to appreciate that the decision to adopt an innovation is 
generally neither as straightforward nor as inevitable as it may sometimes 
seem in retrospect. This situation was particularly stressed above in the 
case ofthe adoption by the Egyptians of such diverse technological entities 
as the hieroglyphic writing system and the process of mummification 


152 


10. Conclusions 


— each of these major innovations emerged from a very specific social 
context. Both writing and the embalming of bodies emerged in many 
other cultures, but their idiosyncratic characteristics in the Nile valley 
derive from the very particular social and environmental features of early 
Egypt. As Sillar and Tite (2000: 11) have reasoned: “There can be no 
simple formulation for the identification of the particular mixture of 
environmental, physical, economic, social, and ideological influences 
that affect technological choices.’ 


The shaping of technology 


Technology of course not only has distinct over-arching contexts, such as 
society, ideology and economics, but also tends to be significantly ‘shaped’ 
and affected by other contemporaneous technologies (see Mackenzie and 
Wajcman 1985 for many examples of this trend). In the conclusion to a 
discussion of Egyptian and Near Eastern glazing technologies, Paynter 
and Tite (2001) make the point that ‘glazing technology did not develop 
in isolation but was influenced by developments in other crafts ... artisans 
were expected to be skilled with many materials and might work in close 
proximity to other artisans in royal workshops’. Chapter 6, above, includes 
examination of the ways in which pyrotechnological artisans, such as 
glass, metal and stone-workers, might well have influenced one another 
technologically, while Chapter 7 includes several examples of the related 
phenomenon, whereby different types of Egyptian military technology 
emerge or evolve primarily in response to one another, particularly in the 
early New Kingdom. Another case-study could also have been added on 
the possible links between stone vessel-making and faience production 
(see Stocks 1997; 2003a: 225-34), whereby the waste powders of ground 
quartz and copper (resulting from the process of drilling stone beads or 
vessels) might have been re-used as the cores of faience artefacts. Thus 
technicians/artisans, techniques and products can often be seen to be 
interlinked and systemically related. 

Two other factors are particularly significant in ancient Egyptian 
technology: first, the interplay of archaism and conservatism, and 
secondly the frequently related role of ritual as an integral element. The 
elements of archaism and conservatism have been particularly discussed 
above in the chapters devoted to mummification, stone-working and 


153 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


medicine, and in all three cases the technological skills are combined with 
utterances and performances drawing on magical and ritualistic resources, 
from embalmers using fishtail knives to Egyptian partibe in the Assyrian 
court. As Trigger (1986: 6) points out, in an analysis of Gordon Childe’s 
attitudes to technology in archaeology, ‘production is carried out, and 
scientific knowledge is applied, within an institutional framework that 
consists of social and religious as well as economic factors — in other 
words, the religious and ritualistic components of ancient Egyptian 
technology are vital parts of the technological packages, and can no more 
be dissociated from the ‘practical’ technical aspects than political or legal 
factors can be detached from modern industrial production. 


Reconstructing the economic contexts 


Our understanding of the variety of types of technological strategies and 
skills that make up the whole system of production and consumption 
in ancient Egypt, gradually evolving from the Predynastic through to 
the end of the pharaonic period, need to be seen within a dynamic and 
developing economic framework, which is still only sketchily understood, 
even in the Late Bronze Age. One reason that the economic scenario is 
still so inadequately documented in Egypt is because so much of the 
discussion to date has tended to be based on textual data rather than 
on the archaeological material that constitutes the nuts and bolts of the 
economy ¬ it is only now that proper material-culture based accounts 
of the economics of ancient Egypt are beginning to be created through 
synthesis of data from the growing number of settlement sites being 
excavated (see, for instance, Werschkun 2011, for economic analysis of 
the Old Kingdom, and Hodgkinson 2010, 2011 for archaeologically 
oriented New Kingdom socio-economics). As Haring (2009: 2) has 
pointed out, in a summary of the current position of ancient Egyptian 
economics, ‘More integrative approaches that include archaeological data 
may well add significantly to our present state of knowledge.’ 

Just as Cuomo (2007: 165) highlights the need to explore the 
specificity of Greek and Roman technology and economics, on the basis 
that ‘neither economy nor technology follow absolute laws, and thus have 
to be seen as deeply embedded in a certain time and place’, so some of 
the case studies presented above have demonstrated that such materials 


154 


10. Conclusions 


as glass and iron began to be used in particular ways and for particular 
reasons in Egypt (as opposed to Mesopotamia or Cyprus for instance), 
rather than there being one single process of technological diffusion that 
broadly applied to all of the societies and economies of western Asia and 
the east Mediterranean. 

If we are to fully understand the nature of Egyptian technological 
developments, we need to analyse and understand the cultural and 
economic contexts within which such processes of material-culture 
change and transmission take place. 


155 


Appendix 1. Measuring space 


The development of the ability to measure both space and time was 
essential to the emergence of many different forms and aspects of 
Egyptian science and technology. The measuring and surveying of 
distances was clearly central to the construction of stone monuments, 
and the knowledge of weights, measures and calculus was fundamental 
to the smooth running of the Egyptian bureaucracy. The latter is evident 
not only from surviving texts but also from tomb scenes showing scribes 
recording the amount of grain or counting cattle, and from the measured 
rations and weights of copper issued at the New Kingdom workmen’s 
village at Deir el-Medina (see Davies 1999: 141 for the monitoring of 
laundry and copper worktools). 

Early systems of measuring were based primarily on the lengths of 
different parts of the human body, particularly fingers, hands, arms and 
feet. The principal unit of measurement was the royal cubit (52.4cm), 
approximately the length of a man’s forearm and represented by the 
hieroglyph in the form of a forearm. The royal cubit comprised 7 palm 
widths each of 4 digits of thumb width (thus 28 digits to the cubit). 
Artists generally used a grid to lay out their drawings, and until the end 
of the Third Intermediate Period (1070-712 BC) they used the ‘short 
cubit of 6 palms (44.9cm) which was roughly the length from elbow to 
thumb tip, conventionally 45cm. From the Saite period (664-525 BC) 
onwards, however, the royal cubit was used by artists. During the Persian 
occupation, on the other hand, the royal Persian cubit of 64.2cm was 
sometimes used. The length of the double rmn was equal to that of the 
diagonal of a square with sides of 1 royal cubit (74.07cm). The double 
rmn, divided into 40 smaller units of 1.85cm each, was the measurement 
used in land surveying, along with the t3 (or mh-t) of 100 royal cubits. 
Area was measured in st3t (100 cubits square), later called the aroura. 


157 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


A number of measuring rods, including the wooden examples used 
by craftsmen and surveyors have survived (see Scott 1942 for a general 
discussion of cubit rods). The most detailed knowledge of the cubit 
derives not from workaday measures, which could vary considerably, but 
from ceremonial cubit-rods cut in stone and deposited in temples, or 
occasionally buried with officials. These were also inscribed with other 
useful information such as inundation levels or references to nomes 
(provinces), forming a kind of compendium of the sort once found in 
school exercise books. Scenes of land surveying are portrayed in several 
Theban tombs of the 18th Dynasty (TT38, TT57, TT69, TT75, and 
a fragment in the British Museum from an unknown tomb: BM 
EA37982; see Berger 1934). A knotted rope was used in surveying land, 
the boundaries of which could be marked with stones, as portrayed in 
the tomb of Menna (TT69, c. 1400 BC; see Campbell 1910: 85, Maher- 
Taha 2002). 

A large number of Egyptian weights — in stone, pottery and bronze — 
have survived (see Weigall 1908, Skinner 1954); the earliest, excavated 
at Naqada, date to the Predynastic period (c. 3500-3000 BC, see Petrie 
1926: 4). Many weights in the Dynastic period are inscribed, while others 
are in the shape of cattle or bulls’ heads or other animals (see Doll 1982: 
60-2). Weights were traditionally made in units known as dbn, weighing 
approximately 93.3g, but after the 12th Dynasty (1991-1783 BC) this 
unit was supplemented by the kitê (kdt) of 9-10g, and the dbn itself was 
increased to weigh 10 kitê. The dbn was a measure of copper, silver or 
gold, whereas the Rité measured silver or gold only. They were used to 
describe the equivalent value of a wide variety of non-metallic goods, 
thus forming a rudimentary price system in the non-monetary economy 
of the pharaonic period (see Cerny 1954). 

The so-called ‘equal arm balance’ was used by the Egyptians. Ifa balance 
is to be stable, its potential energy must be minimal when the beam is 
horizontal, therefore the centre of mass must be below the fulcrum point 
(but not too far below it). For the balance to be sensitive, the angle of 
declination must be as large as possible: this can be improved if the beam 
is made longer. Although there are depictions of small balances used 
by the ancient Egyptians, there are also many depictions of very large 
balances with beams longer than 1.5m. It is necessary to have an element 
of the scales which shows when the beam is in balance (i.e. horizontal); 


158 


Appendix 1 


this can be achieved by a plummet hanging by three strings (often shown 
being steadied by the person doing the weighing), although it is not clear 
exactly why this was hung from three strings. 

Measures of capacity also existed, notably the hin (about 0.47 litres), 
ten hin making one hk3: of about 4.77 litres, and the b3r of 160 hin 
(75.2 litres). The hin could be sub-divided into units as small as 1/32, 
as well as into thirds. Scribes measuring grain are depicted in the late 
18th-Dynasty Theban tomb of the ‘estate inspector’ Menna (TT69, see 
Campbell 1910: 85-106, Maher-Taha 2002). 


159 


Appendix 2. Measuring time 


The earliest Egyptian calendars were based on lunar observations 
combined with the annual cycle of the Nile inundation, measured with 
Nilometers (Heilporn 1989). On this basis the Egyptians divided the 
year into twelve months and three seasons: 3pt (the inundation itself), 
prt (spring-time, when the crops began to emerge) and ¥mw (harvest- 
time). Each season consisted of four thirty-day months (hdw), and each 
month comprised three ten-day weeks. This was an admirably simple 
system, compared with the modern European calendar of unequal 
months, and in fact it was briefly revived in France at the time of the 
French Revolution (Zerubavel 1977). 

The division of the day and night into twelve hours each appears to 
have been initiated by the Egyptians, probably by simple analogy with 
the twelve months of the year, but the division of the hour into sixty 
minutes was introduced by the Babylonians (Smith 1969). The smallest 
unit of time recognised in ancient Egypt was the f, usually translated as 
‘moment and having no definite length. 

The Egyptian year was considered to begin on 19 July (according 
to the later Julian calendar), which was the date of the heliacal rising 
of the dog-star Sirius (Krauss 1985). The Egyptian goddess Sopdet, 
known as Sothis in the Greco-Roman period (332 BC-395 AD), was the 
personification of the ‘dog-star’, which the Greeks called Seirios (Sirius). 
She was usually represented as a woman with a star poised on her head, 
although the earliest depiction, on an ivory tablet of the 1st-Dynasty 
king Djer (c. 3000 BC) from Abydos, appears to show her as a seated 
cow with a plant between her horns (Vandier 1952: 842-3). It has been 
pointed out that, since the plant is symbolic of the year, the Egyptians 
may have already been correlating the rising of the dog-star with the 
beginning of the solar year, even in the early 3rd millennium BC. 


160 


Appendix 2 


Surviving textual accounts of the observation of the heliacal rising of 
the dog-star form the lynch-pin of the traditional chronology of Egypt. 
However, even with the addition of five intercalary ‘epagomenal days 
(corresponding to the birthdays of the deities Osiris, Isis, Horus, Seth 
and Nepthys, see Spalinger 1995), a discrepancy gradually developed 
between the lunar year of 365 days and the real solar year, which was 
about six hours longer. This effectively meant that the civil year and the 
genuine seasonal year were only synchronised once every 1460 years, 
although this does not seem to have been regarded as a fatal flaw until 
the Ptolemaic period, when the concept of the ‘leap year’ was introduced 
in the Alexandrian calendar, later forming the basis for the Julian and 
Gregorian calendars. As well as the civil calendar there were also separate 
religious calendars consisting of festivals and ceremonies associated 
with particular deities and temples (e.g. the Feast of Opet at Thebes, 
celebrated in the second month of 3pt). The priests often calculated the 
dates of these according to the lunar month of about 29.5 days rather 
than according to the civil calendar, since it was essential that many 
of them should coincide with particular phases of the agricultural or 
astronomical cycle. 

The clepsydra (water clock’) was a device for measuring time, consisting 
of a water-filled vessel (usually of stone, copper or pottery) with a hole 
in the base through which the water gradually drained away (Cotterell 
et al. 1986, Couchoud 1988). The earliest surviving examples, in the 
Egyptian Museum, Cairo, date to the 18th Dynasty (1550-1307 BC), 
and the oldest of these is a vessel dating to the reign of Amenhotep III 
found in fragments at Karnak in 1905. Each of the hours in the Karnak 
clock is marked by a row of small Smm-diameter depressions, therefore 
time could only have been read to an accuracy of about 10 minutes. All 
pharaonic-period clocks are of the type in which the velocity of the 
water flow decreases as the water-level drops, therefore the bottom of 
the vessel has a smaller diameter than the top. An official of Amenhotep 
I called Amenemhat (c. 1520 BC) claims, in an inscription in his Theban 
tomb, to have invented the water clock. 

The design of the clocks was complicated by the fact that the length 
of each of the 12 hours of the night changed from one part of the year to 
another, as the overall period of darkness grew shorter or longer. Water- 
clocks therefore had to have 12 different scales, one for each month 


161 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


of the year. Amenemhat gives the lengths of the scale for midwinter: 
12 digits (225mm), and the scale length on the Karnak clock almost 
exactly corresponds to this. This means, however, that the clock would 
have needed another scale, perhaps painted on the rim, since these scales 
would have no longer corresponded to the correct months by the reign of 
Amenhotep III. This conservatism is also the case with the astronomical 
ceilings of Seti I and Ramesses IV, which are almost identical, despite 
one being about 150 years earlier than the other. Cotterell et al. (1986) 
have calculated that the Karnak clock is more likely to have been geared 
up to the civil rather than astronomical night, on the basis that its scales 
tie in with a particular water temperature (given that the viscosity of 
water decreases as the temperature rises). In the Ptolemaic period the 
inflow’ clock was introduced. There are a variety of fragments of stone 
clepsydrae in the collection of the British Museum, incuding part of a 
basalt vessel dating to the reign of Philip Arrhidaeus (EA938, c. 320 
BC), which is marked with vertical lines of small holes relating to the 
twelve hours of the night. Part of a chert cubit rod in the Metropolitan 
Museum, New York, bears the words “The hour according to the cubit: 
a jar(?) of copper filled with water ..., thus implying that the rod was 
dipped into a copper vessel in order to read the time as the water level 
fell (Hayes 1959: 412-13). 

There were two types of ‘shadow-clock (see Clagett 1995: 84, 93, 
Krupp 1979: 195) and a tablet dating to the reign of the 19th-Dynasty 
ruler Merenptah may have been an early sun-dial (Clagett 1995: 97); it 
has a central hole (presumably for a gnomon) and inscribed radiating 
lines for reading off the hours. It has been suggested that the w3s-sceptre, 
consisting of a straight shaft with its handle in the form of the head of 
a canine animal, and its base ending in two prongs, may have originally 
been used as a gnomon, perhaps representing the divine measurement 
of time. 


162 


Appendix 3. Astronomy and astrology 


The first indications of astronomical knowledge in Egypt perhaps take 
the form of circular and linear arrangements of small upright sandstone 
slabs identified in 1992 at the Neolithic site of Nabta Playa, c. 100km 
west of Abu Simbel (Wendorf et al. 1996). It has been argued that this 
Late Neolithic monument, dating to c. 4000 BC, is oriented to such 
astronomical phenomena as the cardinal points and the summer solstice 
(Wendorf and Schild 2001: 463-502), although there is some debate as 
to whether this is genuinely the case, both in terms of date and proposed 
function (e.g. Wengrow 2006: 57, Spence 2010: 176). 

Certainly, by the early pharaonic period textual and visual evidence for 
astronomical observations and undestanding begin to appear, particularly 
with reference to the orientation of monuments and the measurement of 
time. The ceilings of ancient Egyptian temples, tombs and coffins were 
frequently decorated with depictions of the heavens, since most funerary 
and religious entities were regarded as microcosms of the universe itself 
(see, for instance, Kamrin 1999). Just as the sky-goddess Nut was 
thought to spread her star-studded body over the earth, so she was also 
considered to stretch herself protectively over mummies and the houses 
of the gods. In the Old Kingdom, from the reign of the Sth-Dynasty 
pharaoh Unas (2356-2323 BC) onwards, the belief that mortals could 
be reborn in the form of the circumpolar stars led to the depiction of 
large numbers of stars on the ceilings of the corridors and chambers of 
pyramids. Indeed, Utterance 432 in the Pyramid Texts was a request 
for Nut to spread herself over the deceased so that he might be “placed 
among the imperishable stars’ and have eternal life (see Faulkner 1969: 
142). 

The astronomical knowledge of the Egyptian priests and architects at 
this time is indicated by early examples of the ceremony of pd šs (‘stretching 


163 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


the cord’), first attested on a granite door-jamb from Hierakonpolis, 
dating to the reign of the 2nd-Dynasty king Khasekhemwy (Cairo, 
JE 33896; c. 2650 BC, see Engelbach 1934). This method relied — at 
least initially — on the process of sighting on the Great Bear and Orion 
constellations, using a mrpþt (literally, ‘instrument of knowing’), which 
was similar to a primitive astrolabe, and the by, a sighting tool made 
from the central rib of a palm leaf, thus aligning the foundations of the 
pyramids and sun temples with the cardinal points, usually achieving an 
error of less than half a degree (see Zaba 1953, Arnold 1991: 15-16). 
Although the texts and reliefs in temples of later periods continued to 
describe the enactment of this procedure (as in the temple of Horus at 
Edfu) it appears to have become primarily a foundation ceremony and 
in practice many monuments may simply have been aligned in relation 
to the river (most frequently at right angles to the river). Shaltout and 
Belmonte (2008), however, have recently argued, on the basis of fresh 
survey data at 330 temples throughout Egypt, that many Egyptian 
temples appear to have stellar or solar orientations (e.g. towards the stars 
Sirius and Canopus or towards the winter solstice sun). 

The earliest detailed texts relating to astronomy are the ‘diagonal 
calendars’ or ‘star clocks’ (Neugebauer and Parker 1964, Mengoli 1988, 
Leitz 1995) painted on wooden coffin lids of the 9th-12th Dynasties 
and also of the Late Period. These calendars consisted of 36 columns, 
listing the 36 groups of stars (‘decans’”) into which the night-sky was 
divided (Neugebauer and Parker 1969). Each specific decan rose above 
the horizon at dawn for an annual period of ten days. The brightest of 
these was the dog-star Sirius (known to the Egyptians as the goddess 
Sopdet), whose ‘heliacal rising on about 19 July coincided with the 
annual Nile inundation and therefore appears to have been regarded as 
an astronomical event of some importance (see Krauss 1985 on Sothic 
risings, and see Janssen 1987 on the significance of the inundation). 
The god Sah, the mythical consort of Sopdet, was the personification of 
another decan, the constellation of Orion. 

The calendrical system based on decans was flawed by its failure to take 
into account the fact that the Egyptian year was always about six hours 
short, adding up to a slippage of ten days every 40 years. It is therefore 
unlikely that the Middle Kingdom ‘star clocks’ were ever regarded as a 
practical means of measuring time. Nevertheless, the decans were later 


164 


Appendix 3 


depicted on the ceilings of tombs and temples, starting with the 18th- 
Dynasty tomb of Senenmut in western Thebes (TT353, c. 1460 BC; see 
Dorman 1991: 138-46). The ‘astronomical ceilings’ in the Osireion of 
Sety I at Abydos (c. 1300 BC) and the tomb of Ramesses IV (c. 1160 BC) 
in the Valley of the Kings, include cosmological texts (from the Book of 
Nut) describing the period of seventy days spent in the underworld by 
each decan. 

From at least as early as the Middle Kingdom the Egyptians recognised 
five of the planets, portraying them as deities sailing across the heavens 
in barks. These ‘stars that know no rest were Jupiter (Horus who limits 
the two lands), Mars (Horus of the horizon or Horus the red), Mercury 
(Sebegu, a god associated with Seth), Saturn (Horus, bull of the sky) 
and Venus (the one who crosses’ or ‘god of the morning). The ceilings 
of many royal tombs in the Valley of the Kings were decorated with 
depictions of the heavens. In the tombs of Ramesses VI, VII and IX 
(KV9, KV1 and KV6 respectively), dating to the second half of the 12th 
century BC, a set of 24 seated figures representing stars were transected 
by grids of horizontal and vertical lines, allowing the passage of time to 
be measured in terms of the transits of stars through the sky. 

T'he concept of the horoscope (including the belief that the stars could 
influence human destiny) does not seem to have reached Egypt until at least 
the 2nd century BC, by which time the Babylonian zodiac, represented 
on the ceiling of the chapel of Osiris on the roof of the temple of Hathor 
at Dendera, had been adopted — as Evans (2004: 2) puts it: ‘the story of 
the emergence of astrology in Egypt is complex and is only imperfectly 
understood: Mesopotamian doctrines were elaborated and embellished 
in a bilingual culture of Greeks and Egyptians ... astrology expanded 
into a partial vacuum left by the decline of the traditional temple oracle’. 
It is interesting to note, however, that in Egypt the old system of decans 
was simply absorbed into the new astrological texts and images, and that 
astrological activity seems to have been closely associated with temples of 
Sarapis (Evans 2004: 35). A number of Demotic horoscopes, inscribed on 
ostraca, have survived, indicating that the new astrology was embraced 
not only by Greeks but also by native Egyptians (see Neugebauer 1943). 
The surviving lists of lucky and unlucky days — the earliest surviving 
example of such a ‘hemerology’ dates to the Middle Kingdom (P. Kahun 
XVII, 3; UC32192; see Griffith 1898: 62 and Collier and Quirke 2004: 


165 


Ancient Egyptian Technology and Innovation 


26-7) —- appear to have had no connection with astrology, deriving instead 
from the intricacies of religious festivals and mythological events, and, 
according to recent analyses of the main papyri, heavily influenced by the 
calculation of lunar cycles (see Porceddu et al. 2008). 


166 


Abbreviations 


BAR = British Archaeological Reports 

BIFAO = Bulletin de Institut Français d'Archéologie Oriental 

BMP = British Museum Press 

CdE = Chronique dQ Egypte 

CUP = Cambridge University Press 

EA = Egyptian Archaeology: The Bulletin of the Egypt Exploration Society 

EES = Egypt Exploration Society 

HUP = Harvard University Press 

IFAO = Institut Français d@Archéologie Oriental 

JARCE = Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 

JEA = Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 

JNES = Journal of Near Eastern Studies 

KPI = Kegan Paul International 

MDAIK = Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archdologischen Instituts, Abteilung 
Kairo 

MMA = Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

OUP = Oxford University Press 

YUP = Yale University Press 

ZAS = Zeitschrift der fiir Agyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde 


167 


Bibliography 


Allen, J.R., 1988. Genesis in Egypt: The Philosophy of Ancient Egyptian Creation Accounts, 
New Haven: YUP. 

Amiet, P., 1966. Tl y a 5000 ans les Elamites inventaient Pécriture’, Archeologia 12: 20-2. 

Andrassy, P., Budka, J. and F Kammerzell (eds) 2009. Non-textual Marking Systems, 
Writing and Pseudo Script from Prehistory to Present Times, Lingua Aegyptia — Studia 
Monographica No. 8, Göttingen: Lingua Aegyptia. 

Anthes, R., 1928. Die Felseninschriften von Hatnub, Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs. 

Arnold, D., 1991. Building in Egypt: Pharaonic Stone Masonry, New York and Oxford: OUP. 

Arnold, D., 1999. Temples of the Last Pharaohs, New York and Oxford: OUP. 

Arnold, D. and Pischikova, E.1999. ‘Stone vessels: luxury items with manifold 
implications’, Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids. Catalogue of an exhibition held 
at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Sept. 16, 1999-Jan. 9, 2000, ed. C. Ziegler, New 
York: MMA, 121-32. 

Assmann, J., 2001. The Search for God in Ancient Egypt, tr. D. Lorton, Ithaca and 
London: Cornell University Press. 

Assmann, J., 2002. The Mind of Egypt: History and Meaning in the Time of the Pharaohs, 
tr. A. Jenkins, Cambridge MA and London: HUP. 

Aston, D., 2009. Theban potmarks — nothing other than funny signs? Potmarks from 
Deir el-Medineh and the Valley of the Kings’, Pictograms or Pseudo Script? Non- 
textual Identity Marks in Practical Use in Ancient Egypt and Elsewhere, ed. B.].]. 
Haring and O.E. Kaper, Leuven, Peeters, 49-65. 

Aufderheide, A.C., 2003. The Scientific Study of Mummies, Cambridge: CUP. 

Badawy, A., 1963. The transport of the colossus of Djehutihetep”, MIO 8: 325-32. 

Baines, J., 1983. Literacy and ancient Egyptian society’, Man, NS 18/3: 572-99. 

Baines, J., 1989. Communication and display: the integration of early Egyptian art and 
writing’, Antiquity 63: 471-82. 

Baines, ]J., 2007. Visual and Written Culture in Ancient Egypt, Oxford: OUP. 

Baines, J. and Eyre, C.J. 1983. Four notes on literacy’, GM 61: 65-96. 

Bard, K., 1992. ‘Origins of Egyptian writing’, The Followers of Horus, ed. R. Friedman 
and B. Adams, Oxford: Archaeopress, 297-306. 

Bardinet, T., 1995. Les papyrus médicaux de Egypte pharaonique: traduction intégrale et 
commentaire, Paris: Fayard. 


Bass, G.F., 1967. Cape Gelidonya: A Bronze Age Shipwreck, Philadelphia. 
169 


Bibliography 


Bass, G.F., Pulak, C., Collon, D. and Weinstein, J., 1989. The Bronze Age shipwreck 
at Ulu Burun: 1986 campaign’, American Journal of Archaeology 93: 1-29. 

Bauchspies, W.K., Croissant, J. and Restivo, S., 2006. Science, Technology and Society: A 
Sociological Approach, Oxford: Blackwell. 

Baumgartel, E.]., 1970. Petries Naqada Excavation: A Supplement, London: Bernard 
Quaritch. 

Beaujard, P, 2010. From three possible Iron-Age world-systems to a single Afro- 
Eurasian world-system’, Journal of World History 21/1: 1-43. 

Berger, S., 1934. “A note on some scenes of land-measurement’, JEA 20: 54-6. 

Bietak, M., 2011. ‘A Hyksos palace at Avaris’, EA 38: 38-41. 

Bietak, M. and Förstner-Müller, 1., 2009. ‘Der Hyksospalast bei Tell el-Dabca. Zweite 
und Dritte Grabungskampagne (Frühling 2008 und Frühling 2009)’, Agypten und 
Levante 19: 91-120. 

Blackman, A.M., 1953. The Rock Tombs of Meir V, London: EES. 

Blackman, A.M., 1988. The Story of King Kheops and the Magicians Transcribed from 
Papyrus Westcar (Berlin Papyrus 3033), ed. W.V. Davies, Reading: J.V. Books. 

Blackman, A.M. and Peet, TE. 1925. ‘Papyrus Lansing: a translation with notes’, JEA 
11: 284-98. 

Boehmer, R.M., Dreyer, G. and Kromer, B., 1993. ‘Einiger frühzeitliche 
14C-Datierungen aus Abydos und Uruk’, MDAIK 49: 63-8. 

Bökönyi, S., 1968. Mecklenburg collection, part 1: data on Iron Age horses of central 
and eastern Europe’, Bulletin of the American School of Prehistoric Research 25: 3-71. 

Borchardt, L., 1907. Voruntersuchung von Tell el-Amarna im Januar 1907’, Mitteilungen 
der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 34: 14-31. 

Borchardt, L. and Ricke, H., 1980. Die Wobhnbduser in Tell el-Amarna, Berlin: Mann. 

Boulu, G., 1990. Le médecin dans la civilization de Egypte pharaonique, unpublished 
PhD thesis, University of Amiens. 

Bourriau, J., 2000. ‘The Second Intermediate Period (c. 1650-1550 BC)’, Oxford History 
of Ancient Egypt, ed. 1. Shaw, Oxford: OUR, 184-217. 

Bourriau, J. and J. Phillips (eds) 2004. Invention and Innovation: The Social Context of 
Technological Change, Oxford: Oxbow. 

Boyd, R. and Richerson, PJ., 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Brandt-Rauf, PW. and Brandt-Rauf, S.1. 1987. ‘History of occupational medicine: 
relevance of Imhotep and the Edwin Smith papyrus’, British Journal of Industrial 
Medicine 44: 68-70. 

Bréand, G., 2005. Les marques et graffiti sur poteries de Egypte pré- et protodynastique: 
perspectives de recherches û partir de exemple d@ Adaima’, Archéo-Nil 15: 17-30. 
Bréand, G., 2009. “The corpus of pre-firing potmarks from Adaima (Upper Egypt)’, 

British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan 13: 49-72. 

Breasted, J.H., 1930. The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus, published in facsimile and 
hieroglyphic transliteration with translation and commentary in two volumes, Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 


170 


Bibliography 


Brier, B. and Houdin, J.-P, 2008. The Secret of the Great Pyramid, London: Harper 
Collins. 

Brill, R.H., 1970. ‘The chemical interpretation of the texts’, Glass and Glassmaking in 
Ancient Mesopotamia: An Edition of the Cuneiform Texts which contain Instructions for 
Glassmakers with a Catalogue of Surviving Objects, ed. L. Oppenheim, R.B. Brill, D. 
Barag and A. von Saldern, Corning NY: Corning Museum of Glass Press, 105-28. 

Brisson, L., 2000. Myth and knowledge’, Greek Thought: A Guide to Classical Knowledge, 
ed. J. Brunschwig and G.E.R. Lloyd, Cambridge MA: HUB, 39-50. 

Broadhurst, C., 1992. Religious considerations at Qadesh’, Studies in Pharaonic Religion 
and Society in Honour of J. Gwyn Griffths, ed. A.B. Lloyd, London: KPI, 77-81. 
Bryan, B., 1992. Royal and divine statuary’, Egypt's Dazzling Sun: Amenhotep III and 
his World, ed. A. Kozloff and B. Bryan, Bloomington IN: Indiana University Press, 

125-92. 

Bryce, T., 2002. Life and Society in the Hittite World, Oxford: OUP. 

Budge, E.A.W., 1923. Facsimiles of Egyptian Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum, 
London: British Museum [pls XV-XXX: Papyrus Lansing]. 

Caminos, R.A., 1954. Late Egyptian Miscellanies, Oxford: OUP. 

Campbell, C., 1910. Two Theban Princes Kbha-em- Uast & Amen-Kbepeshf, sons of Rameses 
IIL Menna, a Land-Steward, and Their Tombs, London: Oliver and Boyd. 

Carmen, J. and Harding, A. (eds), 1999. Ancient Warfare: Archaeological Perspectives, 
Stroud: Sutton. 

Cerny, J., 1954. ‘Prices and wages in Egypt in the Ramesside period’, Cabiers d’ histoire 
mondiale 1: 903-21. 

Chace, A.B., Bull, L. and Manning, H.P, 1929. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, 
Oberlin: Mathematical Association of America. 

Chafe, W.L., 1982. Integration and involvement in speaking, writing, and oral literature’, 
Spoken and Written Language: Exploring Orality and Literacy, ed. Deborah Tannen, 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Chandler, R., 1976. The Notebooks of Raymond Chandler and English Summer: a Gothic 
Romance, New York: Ecco Press. 

Cialowicz, K., Slabofiski, R. and Debowska, J., 2007. Koté i zloto: poczatki sztuki 
egipskiej: z wykopalisk Instytutu Archeologii Uniwersytetu Jagielloriskiego I Muzeum 
Archeologicznego w Poznaniu. Poznah: Poznahskie Towarzystwo Prehistoryczne. 

Clagett, M., 1995. Ancient Egyptian Science II: Calendars, Clocks and Astronomy, 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. 

Cline, E.H. and Yasur-Landau, A., 2007. Musings from a distant shore: the nature and 
destination of the Uluburun ship and its cargo’, Tel Aviv 34/2: 125-41. 

Clutton-Brock, J., 1974. The Buhen horse’, Journal of Archaeological Science 1: 89-100. 

Cohen, R. and Westerbrook, R., 2000. Amarna Diplomacy: The Beginnings of 
International Relations, Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Collier, M. and Quirke, S., 2004. The UCL Lahun Papyri: Religious, Literary, Legal, 
Mathematical and Medical, Oxford: BAR. 

Cooney, K.M., 2006. ‘An informal workshop: textual evidence for private funerary art 


171 


Bibliography 


production in the Ramesside period’, Living and Writing in Deir el-Medina: Socio- 
historical Embodiment of Deir el-Medina Texts, ed. A. Dorn and T. Hofmann, Basel: 
Aegyptiaca Helvetica, 43-55. 

Cooney, K.M., 2007. The Cost of Death, The Social and Economic Value of Ancient 
Egyptian Funerary Art in the Ramesside Period, Leiden: Egyptologische Uitgaven. 
Cotterell, B., Dickson, F.P. and Kamminga, J., 1986. ‘Ancient Egyptian water-clocks: a 

reappraisal’, Journal of Archaeological Science 13: 31-50. 

Couchoud, S., 1988. ‘Calcul un horloge û eau’, Bulletin de la Société dEgyptologie de 
Genêtve 12: 25-34. 

Craddock, P, 1995. Early Metal Mining and Production, Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press. 

Cunningham, A. and Wilson, P., 1993. De-centring the “Big Picture”: the origins of 
modern science and the modern origins of science’, British Journal for the History of 
Science 26: 407-32. 

Cuomo, S., 2007. Technology and Culture in Greek and Roman Antiquity, Cambridge: 
CUP 

Dalley, S., 1985. Foreign chariotry and cavalry in the armies of Tiglath-Pileser III and 
Sargon IF, Iraq 47: 31-48. 

Daressy, M.G., 1902. Fouilles de la Vallée des Rois (1898-1899), Cairo: Service des 
Antiquités de Egypte. 

Daumas, F., 1956. Le sanatorium de Dendara’, BIEAO 56: 35-57. 

David, R., 2008. ‘Egyptian mummies: an overview’, Egyptian Mummies and Modern 
Science, ed. R. David, Cambridge: CUB, 10-20. 

Davies, B.G., 1999. Whos Who at Deir el-Medina: A Prosopographic Study of the Royal 
Workmen’s Community, Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten. 

Davies, N. de G., 1901. The Mastaba of Ptahbhetep and Akhethetep at Saqqareh II: The 
Mastaba, London: EEF. 

Davies, N. de G., 1905. The Rock Tombs of el Amarna I1, London: EES. 

Davies, N. de G., 1929. “The town house in ancient Egypt’, Metropolitan Museum 
Studies 1/2: 233-55. 

Davies, N. de G., 1930. The Tomb of Ken-Amun at Thebes, New York: MMA. 

Davies, N. de G., 1943. The Tomb of Rekh-Mi-Re at Thebes, New York: MMA. 

Davies, N.M. and Davies, N. de G., 1941. ‘Syrians in the tomb of Amunedjeh’, JEA 
27: 96-8. 

Davis, W., 1976. ‘The origins of register composition in Predynastic Egyptian art, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 96: 404-18. 

Dawson, W.R. and Peet, T.E., 1933. ‘The so-called Poem on the King’s Chariot’, JEA 
19: 167-74. 

Debono, F. 1993-4. ‘Un atelier d’artisans au Ramesseum’, Memnonia IV-V, Cairo: 
IFAO, 37-53. 

de Morgan, J., 1897. Recherches sur les origins de Egypte II, Paris: E. Leroux. 

Dixon, D.M., Clutton-Brock, J. and Burleigh, R. 1979. ‘The Buhen horse’, Excavations 
at Buhen 1: The Archaeological Report, ed. W.B. Emery, London: EES, 191-5. 


172 


Bibliography 


Dodson, A., 1994. The Canopic Equipment of the Kings of Egypt, London: KPI. 

Doll, S.K., 1982. ‘Weights and measures’, Egypt’s Golden Age: the Art of Living in the 
New Kingdom 1558-1085 BC, ed. Brovarski, Doll and Freed, Boston MA: Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts, 58-62. 

Dorman, P., 1991. The Tombs of Senenmut: The Architecture and Decoration of Tombs 71 
and 353, New York: MMA. 

Drenkhahn, R., 1976. Die Handwerker und ihre Titigkeiten im alter Açypten, Wiesbaden: 
Otto Harrassowitz. 

Drenkhahn, R., 1995. ‘Artisans and artists in pharaonic Egypt’, Civilizations of the 
Ancient Near East, ed. J. Sasson, New York: Simon and Schuster, 331-43. 

Dreyer, G., 1993. ‘Umm el-Qaab: Nachuntersuchungen im frühzeitlichen 
Königsfriedhof. 5./6. Vorbericht’, MDAIK 49: 23-62. 

Dreyer, G., 1998. Umm el-Qaab I. Das prûidynastische Königsgrab U-j und seine friihen 
Schriftzeugnisse, AV 86, Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 

Dreyer, G. and Swelim, N., 1982. ‘Die Kleine Stufenpyramide von Abydos-Süd (Sinki) 
Grabungsbericht, MDAIK 38: 83-93. 

Druckman, D. and Güner, S., 2000. ‘A social psychological analysis of Amarna 
diplomacy’, Amarna Diplomacy: The Beginnings of International Relations, ed. R. 
Cohen and R. Westbrook, Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
174-90. 

Duell, P, 1938. The Mastaba of Mereruka, 2 vols, Chicago: Oriental Institute. 

Dunham, D., 1947. Four Kushite colossi in the Sudan’, JEA, 33: 63-5. 

Dunham, D., 1965. ° Building an Egyptian pyramid’, Archaeology 9: 159-65. 

Ebbell, B., 1937. The Papyrus Ebers: The Greatest Egyptian Medical Document, London: 
OUP. 

Edgerton, D., 2006. The Shock of the Old: Technology and Global History since 1900, 
London: Profile. 

Edwards, I.E.S., 1993. The Pyramids of Egypt, 5th edn, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 

Edwards, J.F., 2003. Building the Great Pyramid: probable construction methods 
employed at Giza’, Technology and Culture 44/ 2: 340-54. 

Ehret, C., 1978. ‘Historical inference from transformations in cultural vocabularies’, 
Sprache und Geschichte in Africa 2: 189-218. 

Ehret, C., 2006. ‘Linguistic stratigraphies and Holocene history in northeastern 
Africa’, Archaeology of Early Northeastern Africa. In memory of Lech Krzyzaniak, ed. 
M. Chlodnicki and K. Kroeper, Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum, 1019-55. 

Emery, W.B., 1960. ‘Preliminary report on the excavations of the Egypt Exploration 
Society at Buhen, 1958-59’, Kush 8: 7-10. 

Engelbach, R., 1934. ‘A foundation scene of the Second Dynasty’, JEA 20: 183-4. 

Evans, J., 2004. The astrologer’s apparatus: a picture of professional practice in Greco- 
Roman Egypt’, Journal for the History of Astronomy 35: 1-44. 

Eyre, C., 1987. Work and organization of work in the Old Kingdom and New Kingdom’, 
Labor in the Ancient Near East, ed. M.A. Powell, New Haven CT: American Oriental 
Society, 5-48, 167-222. 


173 


Bibliography 


Eyre, C., 1995. ‘Symbol and reality in everyday life”, Abstracts of the 7th International 
Congress of Egyptologists, Cambridge, 3-9 September 1995, ed. C. Eyre, London, 
55-6. 

Fairman, H.W., 1949. “Town planning in pharaonic Egypt’, Town Planning Review 20: 
32-1. 

Fairman, H.W., 1954. Worship and festivals in an Egyptian temple’, Bulletin of the John 
Rylands Library 37: 165-203. 

Faulkner, R.O., 1969. The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, Warminster: Aris and 
Phillips. 

Feldman, M.H., 2006. Diplomacy by Design: Luxury Arts and an ‘International Style’ in 
the Ancient Near East, 1400-1200 BCE, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Figueiredo, A., 2004. Locality HK6 at Hierakonpolis: results of the 2000 field season’, 
Egypt at its Origins: Studies in Memory of Barbara Adams, ed. S. Hendrickx, R.F. 
Friedman, K.M. Cialowicz and M. Chlodnicki, Leuven: Peeters, 1-24. 

Finkel, I.L. and Reade, J.E., 1996. ‘Assyrian hieroglyphs’, Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologie und 
Vorderasiatische Archdologie 86: 244-68. 

Fischer-Elfert, H., 1986. Die Satirische Streitschrift der Papyrus Anastasi I: Übersetzung 
und Kommentar, Ãgyptologische Abhandlungen 44, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 

Fitchen, J., 1978. Building Cheops pyramid’, Journal of the Society of Architectural 
Historians 37/1 (Mar. 1978), 3-12. 

Foley, J.M. 1980. ‘Oral literature: premises and problems’, Choice 18: 487-96. 

Friedman, R., 2000. Figures in flint’, Nekhen News 12: 14-17. 

Friedman, R.F., Maish, A., Fahmy, A.G., Darnell, J.C. and Johnson, E.D., 1999. 
‘Preliminary report on field work at Hierakonpolis: 1996-1998’, JARCE 36: 1-35. 

Friedman, R.F., Watrell, E., Jones, J., Fahmy, A.G., Van Neer, W. and Linseele, V., 
2002. ‘Excavations at Hierakonpolis’, Archéonil 12: 55-68. 

Fukagawa, S., 2011. Investigation into Dynamics of Ancient Egyptian Pharmacology: A 
Statistical Analysis of Papyrus Ebers and Cross-cultural Medical Thinking, Oxford: 
Archaeopress. 

Gale, R., Gasson, P, Hepper, N. and Killen, G., 2000. “Wood, Ancient Egyptian 
Materials and Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson and I. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 334-71. 

Gallorini, C., 2009. Incised marks on pottery and other objects from Kahun’, Pictograms 
or Pseudo Script? Non-textual Identity Marks in Practical Use in Ancient Egypt and 
Elsewhere, ed. B.J.]. Haring and O.E. Kaper, Leuven, Peeters, 107-42. 

Gardiner, A.H., 1911. Egyptian Hieratic Texts, Transcribed, Translated and Annotated, 
Leipzig: Hinrichs. 

Gardiner, A.H., 1947. Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, 3 vols, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Gardiner, A.H., 1955. The Ramesseum Papyri, Oxford: OUP. 

Gardiner, A.H. and Faulkner, R.O., 1941-52. The Wilbour Papyrus, 4 vols, Oxford: 
OUP. 

Garstang, J., 1903. Mabasna and Bet Khallaf, London: Bernard Quaritch. 

Ghalioungui, P, 1973. The House of Life (Per Ankh): Magic and Medical Science in 
Ancient Egypt, Amsterdam: B.M. Israel. 


174 


Bibliography 


Ghalioungui, P., 1983. The Physicians of Pharaonic Egypt, Cairo: Al-Ahram Center for 
Scientific Translation. 

Ghalioungui, P., 1987. The Ebers Papyrus: 4 New English Translation, Commentaries and 
Glossaries. Cairo: Al-Ahram Center for Scientific Translation. 

Gille, B., 1980. Les mécaniciens grecs: la naissance de la technologie. Paris: Gallimard. 

Gillings, R.J., 1972. Mathematics in the Time of the Pharaohs, Cambridge MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Glanville, S.R.K., 1927. ‘The mathematical leather roll in the British Museum’, JE4 
13: 232-8. 

Gledhill, J. and Larssen, M.T., 1982. ‘The Polanyi paradigm and the dynamics of archaic 
states: Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica’, Theory and Explanation in Archaeology: The 
Southampton Conference, ed. C. Renfrew, M.J. Rowlands and B.A. Segraves, New 
York and London: Academic Press, 197-230. 

Goedicke, H. (ed.), 1985. Perspectives on the Battle of Kadesh, Baltimore MD: Halgo. 

Goneim, M.Z., 1957. Horus Sekhem-Khet: The Unfinished Step Pyramid at Saqqara, 
Cairo: IFAO. 

Goody, ]J., 1968. Literacy in Traditional Societies, Cambridge: CUP. 

Goody, J., 1977. The Domestication of the Savage Mind, Cambridge: CUP. 

Goody, J., 1986. The Logic of Writing and the Organization of Society, Cambridge: CUP. 

Goody, J., 1987. The Interface between the Written and the Oral, Cambridge: CUP. 

Goren, Y., Finkelstein, I. and Naaman, N. (eds) 2004. Inscribed in Clay: Provenance 
Study of the Amarna Tablets and Other Ancient Near Eastern Texts, Tel Aviv: Emery 
and Claire Yass Publications in Archaeology. 

Goyon, J.C., 1972. Rituels funéraires de Tancienne Egypte, Paris: Editions du Cerf. 

Grapow, H., von Deines, H. and Westendorf, W., 1954-73. Grundriss der Medizin der 
alten Agypter, 9 vols, Berlin: Akademie Verlag. 

Grãslund, B., 1981. “The background to C.J. Thomsen’s Three-Age system’, Towards a 
History of Archaeology, ed. G. Daniel, London: Thames and Hudson, 45-50. 

Griffith, FLI., 1896. Beni Hasan III, London: EEF. 

Griffith, FLI., 1898. The Petrie Papyri: Hieratic Papyri from Kahun and Gurob 
(Principally of the Middle Kingdom), 2 vols, London: Bernard Quaritch. 

Gurney, O.R. 1954. The Hittites, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 

Haarer, P, 2001. Problematising the transition from bronze to iron’, The Social Context 
of Technological Change, ed. A.J. Shortland, Oxford: Oxbow, 255-73. 

Habachi, L., 1960. ‘Notes on the unfinished obelisk of Aswan and another smaller one 
in Gharb Aswan’, Drevni i Egipet, ed. V.V. Struve, Moscow: Institut Vostokovedeni 
i a, Akademi i a Nauk USSR, 216-35. 

Habachi, L., 1972. The Second Stela of Kamose and his Struggle against the Hyksos Ruler 
and his Capital, Glückstadt: Verlag JJ Augustin. 

Halioua, B. and Ziskind, B., 2005. Medicine in the Days of the Pharaohs, Cambridge 
MA: HUP. 

Hall, E.S., 1986. The Pharaoh Smites his Enemies: 4 Comparative Study, Munich: 
Deutscher Kunstverlag,. 


175 


Bibliography 


Harer, W.B., 1994. Peseshkef: the first special-purpose surgical instrument’, Obstetrics 
and Gynecology 83: 1053-5. 

Haring, B.J.J. 2009. ‘Economy’, UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology, ed. W. Wendrich, 
Los Angeles: UCLA. [http://escholarship.org/uc/iten/2t01s4qj] 

Haring, B.J.J. and Kaper, O.E.(eds), 2009. Pictograms or Pseudo Script? Non-textual 
Identity Marks in Practical Use in Ancient Egypt and Elsewhere, Leuven, Peeters. 

Harvey, S., 1988. Fish-tail knife’, Mummies and Magic: The Funerary Arts in Ancient 
Egypt, ed. S. D’Auria, P Lacovara and C.H. Roehrig, Cambridge MA: Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts, 73. 

Havelock, E.A. 1963. Preface to Plato, Oxford: Blackwell. 

Hawass, Z., 2003. Secrets from the Sand: My Search for Egypt's Past, London: Thames 
and Hudson. 

Hayes, W.C., 1959. Scepter of Egypt II: The Hyksos Period and the New Kingdom, New 
York: MMA. 

Heidorn, L.A., 1997. ‘The horses of Kush’, JNES 56/2: 105-14. 

Heilporn, P., 1989. ‘Les nilomètres d@Elephantine et la date de la crue’, CdE 64: 
283-5. 

Heinz, S.C., 2001. Die Feldzugdarstellungen des Neuen Reiches, Vienna: Österreichische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

Helck, W., 1975. Wirtschafisgeschichte des Alten Agypten im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend vor 
Chr, Leiden: Brill. 

Helck, W., 1990. Thinitische Töpfmarken, AA 50, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 

Henderson, J., 2000. The Science and Archaeology of Materials: An Investigation of 
Inorganic Materials, London: Routledge. 

Hendrickx, S. and Vermeersch, P., 2000. ‘Prehistory: from the Palaeolithic to the 
Badarian culture (c. 700,000-4000 BC)’, Oxford History of Ancient Egypt, ed. I1. Shaw, 
Oxford: OUP. 

Herold, A., 1999. Streitwagentechnologie in der Ramses-Stadt: Bronze an Pferd und 
Wagen, Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 

Herold, A., 2007. Streitwagentechnologie in der Ramses-Stadt: Kniufe, Knöpfe und 
Scheiben aus Stein, Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 

Hester, TR. and Heizer, R.F., 1981. Making Stone Vases: Ethnoarchaeological Studies 
at an Alabaster Workshop in Upper Egypt, Monographic Journals of the Near East, 
Malibu CA: Undena Publications. 

Hikade, T., 1997. ‘Ein auergewöhnliches Silexmesser aus Abydos’, MDAIK 53: 85-9. 

Hikade, T., 2002. ‘Die lithischen Industrien des Alten Reiches auf Elephantine’, 
MDAIK 58: 305-22. 

Hikade, T., 2003. ‘Getting the ritual right — fishtail knives in Predynastic Egypt’, Egypt 
— Temple of the Whole World: Studies in Honour of Jan Assmann, Studies in the 
History of Religions 97, ed. S. Meyer, Leiden and Boston: Brill, 137-51. 

Hikade, T., 2004. ‘Some thoughts on Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age flint scrapers 
in Egypt, MDAIK 60: 57-68. 

Hikade, T., 2010. ‘Stone tool production’, UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology, ed. 


176 


Bibliography 


W. Wendrich, Los Angeles: UCLA. http://digital2.library.ucla.edu/viewItem. 
do?ark=21198/zz0025h6kk 

Hodgkinson, A., 2010. ‘High-status industries in the capital and royal cities of the New 
Kingdom’, Commerce and Economy in Ancient Egypt, ed. A. Hudecz and M. Petrik, 
Oxford: Archaeopress, 71-9. 

Hodgkinson, A., 2011. ‘Mass production in New Kingdom Egypt: the industries of 
Amarna and Piramesse’, Current Research in Egyptology 2009: Proceedings of the Tenth 
Annual Symposium, ed. D. Boatright, J. Corbelli and C. Malleson, Oxford: Oxbow, 
81-98. 

Hoffman, M.A., 1980. ‘A rectangular Amratian house from Hierakonpolis and its 
significance for predynastic research’, JNES 39: 119-37. 

Holmes, D.L., 1992. ‘Chipped stone-working craftsmen, Hierakonpolis and the rise 
of civilization in Egypt’, The Followers of Horus; Studies Dedicated to Michael Allen 
Hoffman 1944-1990, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams, Oxford: Oxbow Books, 
37-44. 

Hornung, E., 1999. The Ancient Egyptian Books of the Afterlife, Ithaca and London: 
Cornell University Press. 

Hulit, T., 2006. ‘Tut Ankhamun’s body armour: materials, construction, and the 
implications for the military industry’, Current Research in Egyptology 2004, ed. R. 
Dann, Oxford: Oxbow, 100-11. 

Imhausen, A., 2007. ‘Egyptian mathematics’, The Mathematics of Egypt, Mesopotamia, 
China, India and Ilam: A Sourcebook, ed. V.J. Katz, Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 7-57. 

Imhausen, A. and Ritter, J., 2004. ‘Mathematical fragments: UC21114B, UC32118B, 
UC32134A+B, UC32159-UC32162’, The UCL Labhun Papyri: Religious, Literary, 
Legal, Mathematical and Medical, ed. M. Collier and S. Quirke, Oxford: BAR, 71-98. 

Iversen, E. (ed.), 1939. Papyrus Carlsberg No. VIII, With Some Remarks on the Egyptian 
Origin of Some Popular Birth Prognoses, Copenhagen: Munksgaard. 

Izre’el, S., 1995. ‘The Amarna letters from Canaan’, Civilizations of the Ancient Near 
East, ed. J.M. Sasson, New York: Scribners, 2411-19. 

Izre’el, S., 1997. The Amarna Scholarly Tablets, Groningen: Styx. 

Janssen, J.J., 1975. Commodity Prices from the Ramessid Period: An Economic Study of 
the Village of Necropolis Workmen at Thebes, Leiden: Brill. 

Janssen, J.]., 1987. The day the inundation began’, JNES 46: 129-36. 

Janssen, J.J., 1992. °A New Kingdom settlement: the verso of PBM 10068’, Altorientalische 
Forschungen 19: 8-23. 

Jaroš-Deckert, B., 1984. Grabung in Assasif, V: Das Grab des Jnj=jtj.f. Die Wandmalereien 
der XI. Dynastie, Cairo: DAIK. 

Jelinkova-Reymond, E., 1956. Les inscriptions de la statue guérisseuse de Djed-her-le- 
Sauveur, Cairo: IFAO. 

Johnston, K.J., 2001. ‘Classic Maya scribe capture’, Antiquity 75: 373-81. 

Jonckheere, F., 1951. La place du prêtre de Sekhmet dans le corps médical de Pancienne 
Egypte’, Archives internationals d’ histoire des sciences 4: 915-24. 


177 


Bibliography 


Jones, J., 2002. “Towards mummification: new evidence for early developments’, E4 
21: 5-7. 

Jérdeczka, M., Krélik, H., Masojé, M. and Schild, R., 2011. ‘Early Holocene pottery 
in the Western Desert of Egypt: new data from Nabta Playa’, Antiquity 85: 99-115. 

Junker, H., 1928. Die Stele des Hofarztes Irj’, ZAÃS 63: 53-70. 

Junker, H., 1953. Grabungen auf dem Friedhof des Alten Reiches bei den Pyramiden von 
Giza 11. Vienna: Rohrer. 

Kahl, J., 2002-4. Friihdigyptisches Woörterbuch, 2 vols, Wiesbaden: Harassowitz. 

Kaiser, W., Arnold, F., Bommas, M., Hikade, T., Hoffmanm, F., Jaritz, H., Kopp, 
P., Niederburger, W., Paetznick, J.-P, von Pilgrim, B., von Pilgrim, C., Raue, D., 
Rzeuska, T., Schaten, S., Seiler, A., Stalder, L. and Ziermann, M., 1999. ‘Stadt und 
Tempel von Elephantine. 25./ 26./ 27. Grabungsbericht, MDAIK 55: 63-236. 

Kamrin, J., 1999. The Cosmos of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hasan, London and New York: 
KPI. 

Kãnel, F. von, 1984. Les prétres-ouûb de Sekhmet et les conjurateurs de Serket, Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France. 

Kaplony, P, 1963. Die Inschriften der ûgyptischen Friihzeit, 3 vols, Wiesbaden: 
Harassowitz. 

Kemp, B.J., 1972. “Temple and town in ancient Egypt’, Man, Settlement and Urbanism, 
ed. PJ. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G.W. Dimbleby, London: Duckworth, 57-80. 
Kemp, B.J., 1977. The city of el-Amarna as a source for study of urban society in 

ancient Egypt, WA 9: 123-39. 

Kemp, B.J., 1979. ‘Preliminary report on the el-Amarna survey, 1978’, JEA 65: 5-12. 

Kemp, B.J., 1981. The character of the South Suburb at el-Amarna’, MDOG 113: 
81-97. 

Kemp, B.J. (ed.), 1984. Amarna Reports 1, London: EES. 

Kemp, B.J. (ed.), 1986. Amarna Reports III, London: EES. 

Kemp, B.J. (ed.), 1988. Amarna Reports V, London: EES. 

Kemp, B.J. (ed.), 1995. Amarna Reports VI, London: EES. 

Kemp, B.J., 2000. ‘Soil (including mud-brick architecture)’, Ancient Egyptian Materials 
and Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson and I. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 78-103. 

Kemp, B.J., 2006. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilisation, 2nd edn, London: Routledge. 

Kemp, B., and Stevens, A., 2010. Busy Lives at Amarna: Excavations in the Main City 
(Grid 12 and the House of Ranefer, N49.18), I: The Excavations, Architecture and 
Environmental Remains, London: EES. 

Kendall, T., 1981. ‘Gurpiša ša aweli: the helmets of the warriors at Nuzi’, Studies on the 
Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians in Honour of Ernest R. Lacheman 
on his Seventy-Fifth Birthday, April 29, 1981, ed. M.A. Morrison and D.J. Owen, 
Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 201-31. 

Killen, G. and Weiss, L., 2009. ‘Markings on objects of daily use from Deir el-Medina: 
ownership marks or administrative aids?, Non-Textual Marking Systems, Writing 
and Pseudo Script from Prehistory to Modern Times, ed. P. Andrassy, J. Budka and F. 
Kammerzell, Göttingen: Lingua Aegyptian. 


178 


Bibliography 


Kinnier Wilson, J.V., 1972. The Nimrud Wine Lists: A Study of Men and Administration 
at the Assyrian Capital in the Eighth Century BC, London: British School of 
Archaeology in Iraq. 

Kobusiewicz, M., 1996. ‘Technology, goals and efficiency of quartz exploitation in 
the Khartoum Neolithic: the case of Kadero’, Interregional Contacts in the Later 
Prehistory of Northeastern Africa, Studies in African Archaeology 5, ed. L. Krzyzaniak, 
K. Kroeper and M. Kobusiewicz, Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum, 347-54. 

Kossmann, M., 1994. ‘Amarna-Akkadian as a mixed language’, Mixed Languages, ed. 
P. Bakker and M. Mous, Amsterdam: IFOTT, 169-73. 

Kramar, T., 2009. ‘Archãologie: ãlteste Keilschrift aus Ãgypten’, Die Press.com, 28 June 
2009, http://diepresse.com/home/science/482083/index.do?_vl_backlink. 

Krauss, R., 1985. Sothis- und Monddaten: Studien zur astronomischen und technischen 
Chronologie Altûgyptens, Hildesheim: Gerstenberg Verlag. 

Krupp, E.C., 1979. In Search of Ancient Astronomies, New York: Doubleday. 

Kubler, G., 1962. The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things, New Haven: 
YUP 

Lacovara, P., 1990. Deir el-Ballas: Preliminary Report on the Deir el- Ballas Expedition, 
1980-1986. Cairo: ARCE. 

Lehner, M., 1985a. ‘The development of the Giza necropolis: the Khufu Project’, 
MDAIK 41: 109-43. 

Lehner, M., 1985b. ‘A contextual approach to the Giza Pyramids’, Archiv fiir 
Orientforschung 31: 136-58. 

Lehner, M., 1997. The Complete Pyramids, London: Thames and Hudson. 

Lehner, M., Kamel, M., and Tavares, A., 2009. Giza Plateau Mapping Project Seasons 
2006-2007: Preliminary Report, Boston MA: AERA. 

Leitz, C., 1995. Altigyptische Sternubhren, Leuven: Peeters. 

Lemonnier, P, 1993. Technological Choices: Transformation in Material Cultures since 
the Neolithic, London: Routledge. 

Lichtheim, M., 1976. Ancient Egyptian Literature II: The New Kingdom, Los Angeles: 
UCLA Press. 

Lichtheim, M., 1980. Ancient Egyptian Literature III: The Late Period, Los Angeles: 
UCLA Press. 

Lilyquist, C. and Brill, R.H., 1993. Studies in Early Egyptian Glass, New York: MMA. 

Littauer, M.A. and Crouwel, J.H., 1979. Wheeled Vehicles and Ridden Animals in the 
Ancient Near East, Leiden and Cologne: E.]. Brill. 

Littauer, M.A. and Crouwel, J.H., 1985. Chariots and Related Equipment from the Tomb 
of Tutankhamun, Oxford: Griffith Institute. 

Lloyd, G.E.R., 1975. “A note on Erasistratus of Ceos’, Journal of Hellenic Studies 95: 
172-5. 

Lloyd, G.E.R., 2004. Ancient Worlds, Modern Reflections: Philosophical Perspectives on 
Greek and Chinese Science and Culture, Oxford: OUP. 

Longrigg, J., 1998. Greek Medicine from the Heroic to the Hellenistic Age: A Source Book, 
London: Duckworth. 


179 


Bibliography 


Lorton, D., 1974. “Terminology related to the laws of warfare in Dynasty XVIIT, 
JARCE 11: 53-68. 

Lucas, A., 1926. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries, 1st edn, London: Edward 
Arnold. 

Lucas, A., 1932. ‘The use of natron in mummification’, JEA 18: 125-40. 

Lucas, A., 1962. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries, 4th edn, rev. J.R. Harris, 
London: Edward Arnold. 

Lyons, J., 1995. Colour in language’, Colour: Art and Science, ed. T. Lamb and J. 
Bourriau, Cambridge: CUB, 194-224. 

Lythgoe, A.M. and Dunham, D., 1965. The Predynastic Cemetery N7000, Naga ed- Dêr 
Part IV, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 

Mackenzie D. and Judy Wajcman, J. (eds), 1985. The Social Shaping of Technology, 
Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 

Maher-Taha, M., 2002. Le tombeau de Menna (TT69), Cairo: Centre de Documentation 
et dQ Etudes sur PAncienne Egypte (CEDAE). 

Mariette, A., 1871. Les papyrus égyptiens du musée de Boulaq I, Paris: Franck. 

Mathieu, B., Meeks, D. and Wissa, M. (eds) 2006. L’Apport de Egypte û Histoire des 
Techniques: Méthodes, Chronologie et Comparaisons, Cairo: IFAO. 

McDowell, A.G., 1993. Hieratic Ostraca in the Hunterian Museum (the Colin Campbell 
Ostraca), Glasgow and Oxford: Griffith Institute. 

McDowell, A.G., 1999. Village Life in Ancient Egypt: Laundry Lists and Love Songs, 
Oxford: OUP. 

McLeod, W.E., 1970. Composite Bows from the Tomb of Tutankhamun, Oxford: Griffith 
Institute. 

McLeod, W.E., 1982. Self Bows and Other Archery Tackle from the Tomb of Tutankhamun, 
Oxford, Griffith Institute. 

Mengoli, P., 1988. Some considerations of Egyptian star clocks’, Archiv der Geschichte 
der Naturwissenschaften 22/4: 1127-50. 

Meskell, L. and Joyce, R.A., 2003. Embodied Lives: Figuring Ancient Maya and Egyptian 
Experience, London: Routledge. 

Miatello, L., 2010. The nb.t in the Moscow mathematical papyrus, and a tomb model 
from Beni Hasan’, JEA 96: 228-32. 

Midant-Reynes, B., 1987. Contribution ã étude de la société prédynastique: le cas du 
couteau “ripple-flake”, SA4K 14: 185-224. 

Miller, R., McEwen, E. and Bergman, C.A., 1986. ‘Experimental approaches to ancient 
Near Eastern archery’, World Archaeology, 18/2: 178-95. 

Mokhtar, G., Riad, H. and Iskander, Z., 1973. Mummification in Ancient Egypt, Cairo: 
Cairo Museum. 

Mokyr, J., 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress, 
New York and Oxford: OUP. 

Moorey, PR.S., 1986. ‘The emergence of the light, horse-drawn chariot in the Near 
East c. 2000-1500 BC’, World Archaeology 18/2: 196-215. 

Moorey, PR.S., 1989. ‘The Hurrians, the Mitanni and technological innovation’, 


180 


Bibliography 


Archaeologica Iranica and Orientalis: Miscellanea in Honorem Louis Vanden Berghe, 
ed. L. de Meyer and E. Haerinck. Ghent: Peters, 273-86. 

Moorey, PR.S., 1994. Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Moorey, PR.S., 2001. ‘The mobility of artisans and opportunities for technology 
transfer’, The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near East, 1650- 
1550 BC, ed. A.J. Shortland. Oxford: Oxbow, 1-14. 

Moran, W.L., 1992. The Amarna Letters, London and Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 

Morenz, L., 2004. Bild-Buchstaben und symbolische Zeichen. Die Herausbildung der Schrift in 
der hohen Kultur Altûgyptens, OBO 205, Fribourg and Göttingen: Saint-Paul. 

Moussa, A.M. and Altenmüller, H. 1971. The Tomb of Nefer and Ka-Hay: Old Kingdom 
Tombs at the Causeway of King Unas at Saqqara, Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 

Murnane, W.J., 1995. Texts from the Amarna Period in Egypt, Atlanta GA: Scholars Press. 

Naville, E., 1908. The Temple of Deir el Bahari VI, London: EEF. 

Needler, W., 1956. “A flint knife of King Djer’, JE4 42: 41-4. 

Neugebauer, O., 1943. Demotic horoscopes’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 

63: 115-27. 

Neugebauer, O. and Parker, R.A., 1964. Egyptian Astronomical Texts II: The Ramesside 

Star Clocks, Providence RI: Brown University. 

Neugebauer, O. and Parker, R.A., 1969. Egyptian Astronomical Texts III: Decans, 

Planets, and Zodiacs, Providence RI: Brown University. 

Newberry, PE., 1893. Beni Hassan II, London: EES. 

Newton, R.G., 1980. Recent views on ancient glasses’, Glass Technology, 21/4: 173-83. 

Nicholson, PT., 1993. Ancient Egyptian Faience and Glass, Aylesbury: Shire. 

Nicholson, P.T., 2006. ‘Glass vessels from the reign of Thutmose III and a hitherto 

unknown glass chalice’, Journal of Glass Studies 48: 11-21. 

Nicholson, PT., 2007. Brilliant Things for Akhenaten: The Production of Glass, Vitreous 

Materials and Pottery at Amarna Site 045.1, London: EES. 

Nicholson, PT. and Henderson, J., 2000. ‘Glass’, Ancient Egyptian Materials and 

Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson and 1. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 195-226. 

Nicholson, PT., Jackson, C.M. and Trott, K.M. 1997. ‘The Ulu Burun glass ingots, 

cylindrical vessels and Egyptian glass’, JEA 83: 143-53. 

Nicholson, PT. and Shaw, I. (eds), 2000. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, 

Cambridge: CUP. 

Nims, C.F., 1950. ‘Egyptian catalogues of things’, JNES 9: 253-62. 

Nissen, H.J., 1986. The archaic texts from Uruk’, World Archaeology 17: 317-34. 

Nunn, J., 1996. Ancient Egyptian Medicine, London: BMP. 

O’Connor, D., 1972. ‘The geography of settlement in ancient Egypt’, Man, Settlement 
and Urbanism, ed. PJ. Ucko, R. Tringham and G.W. Dimbleby, London: 
Duckworth, 681-98. 

Ogden, J., 2000. ‘Metals’, Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson 
and I. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 148-76. 


181 


Bibliography 


Onasch, H.-U., 1994. Die assyrischen Eroberungen Agyptens, Agypten und Altes 
Testament 27, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

Ong, W.]., 2002. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, London: 
Routledge. 

Oppenheim, L., 1978. Man and nature in Mesopotamian civilization’, Dictionary of 
Scientific Biography 15, Supplement 1. New York: Scribner, 634-66. 

Oppenheim, L., Brill, R.H., Barag, D. and von Saldern, A., 1970. Glass and Glassmaking 
in Ancient Mesopotamia: An Edition of the Cuneiform Texts which Contain Instructions 
for Glassmakers with a Catalogue of Surviving Objects, Corning NY: Corning Museum 
of Glass Press. 

Osing, J., 1981. ‘Onomastika’, Lexikon der Agyptologie IV, ed. W. Helck, E. Otto and 
W. Westendorf, Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz, 572. 

Panagiotaki, M., Maniatis, Y., Kavoussanaki, D., Hatton, G. and Tite, M., 2004. The 
production technology of Aegean Bronze Age vitreous materials’, Invention and 
Innovation: The Social Context of Technological Change 2, Egypt, the Aegean and the 
Near East 1650-1150 BC, ed. J. Bourriau and J. Phillips. Oxford: Oxbow, 149-75. 

Parker, R.A., 1972. Demotic Mathematical Papyri, Providence: Brown University Press. 

Parkinson, R., 1997. The Tale of Sinuhe and Other Ancient Egyptian Poems, 1940-1640 
BC, Oxford: OUP. 

Parkinson, R. and Schofield, L., 1993. ‘Akhenaten’s army’, E4 3: 34-5. 

Parry, D., 2004. Engineering the Pyramids, Stroud: Sutton. 

Pearce, L.E., 1999. ‘Sepiru and luaba: scribes of the late first millennium’, Languages 
and Cultures in Contact: At the Crossroads of Civilizations in the Syro-Mesopotamian 
Realm, ed. K. van Lerberghe and G. Voet, Leuven: Peeters, 355-68. 

Peet, TE., 1930. The Great Tomb-Robberies of the 20th Egyptian Dynasty, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Peet, TE., 1931. ‘A problem in Egyptian geometry’, JE4 17: 100-6. 

Peet, TE. and Woolley, C.L., 1923. City of Akhenaten I, London: EES. 

Pellegrin, P, 2000. ‘Medicine’, Greek Thought: 4 Guide to Classical Knowledge, ed. ]. 
Brunschwig and G.E.R. Lloyd, Cambridge MA: Belknap Press, 387-414. 

Peltenburg, E.J., 1987. ‘Early faience: recent studies, origins, and relations with glass’, 
Early Vitreous Materials, ed. M. Bimson and I. Freestone, London: BMP, 5-29. 

Pendlebury, J.D.S., 1931. ‘Preliminary report of excavations at Tell el-Amarnah 1930- 
31, JEA 17: 240-3. 

Pendlebury, J.D.S., 1932. ‘Preliminary report of excavations at Tell el-Amarnah 1931- 
32’, JEA 18: 143-9. 

Petrie, W.M.F., 1883. The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, London: Field and Tuer. 

Petrie, W.M.E., 1892. Medum, London: Nutt. 

Petrie, W.M.F., 1894. Tell el Amarna, London: EEF. 

Petrie, W.M.F., 1897. Six Temples at Thebes, London: Bernard Quaritch. 

Petrie, W.M.F., 1909. The Arts and Crafts of Egypt, Edinburgh: Foulis. 

Petrie, W.M.F., Wainwright, G.A. and Mackay, E., 1912. The Labyrinth, Gerzeh and 
Mazghunah, London: ERA. 


182 


Bibliography 


Petrie, W.M.F., 1917. Tools and Weapons, London: Egyptian Research Account. 

Petrie, W.M.F., 1926. Weights and Measures, London: Egyptian Research Account. 

Petrie, W.M.F. and Quibell, J.E., 1896. Naqada and Ballas, London: British School of 
Archaeology in Egypt. 

Pfaffenberger, B., 1988. ‘Fetishized objects and humanized nature: towards a social 
anthropology of technology’, Man (n.s.) 23: 236-52. 

Piggott, S., 1969. ‘The first wagons and carts: twenty-five years later’, Bulletin of the 
Institute of Archaeology 16: 3-18. 

Pinch, G., 1983. ‘Childbirth and female figurines at Deir el]-Medina and el-Amarna’, 
Orientalia 52: 405-14. 

Pinch, G., 1994. Magic in Ancient Egypt, London: BMP. 

Podzorski, P.V., 1990. Their Bones Shall Not Perish: An Examination of Predynastic 
Human Skeletal Remains from Naga-ed-Dêr in Egypt, New Malden: SIA. 

Pons Mellado, E., 2006. “Trade of metals between Egypt and other countries from the 
Old until the New Kingdom’, Chronique {Egypte 81: 7-16. 

Porceddu, S., Jetsu, L., Tapio, M. and Toivari-Viitala, J., 2008. ‘Evidence of periodicity 
in ancient Egyptian calendars of lucky and unlucky days’, CAJ 18: 327-39. 

Postgate, N., Wang, T. and Wilkinson, T., 1995. ‘The evidence for early writing: 
utilitarian or ceremonial?’, Antiquity 69: 459-80. 

Pusch, E., 1996. “ “Pi-Ramesses-beloved-ofAmun, headquarters of they chariotry”: 
Egyptians and Hittites in the Delta residence of the Ramessides’, Pelizaeus Museum 
Hildesheim: the Egyptian Collection, ed. A. Eggebrecht, Mainz: Philipp von Zabern, 
126-45. 

Pusch, E. and Rehren, T., 2007. Hochtemperatur- Technologie in der Ramses-Stadt: 
Rubinglas fiir den Pharao, Hildesheim: Gerstenberg,. 

Quibell, J.E., 1898. The Ramesseum, London: EEF. 

Quibell, J.E., 1913. The Tomb of Hesy: Excavations at Saqqara, Cairo: Service des Antiquités. 

Quibell, J.E. and Hayter, A.G.K., 1927. Teti Pyramid: North Side, Cairo: Institut. 
Français dQ Archéologie Orientale. 

Raban, A., 1989. ‘The Medinet Habu ships: another interpretation’, International 
Journal of Nautical Archaeology and Underwater Exploration 18/2: 163-71. 

Radner, K., 2009. ‘The Assyrian king and his scholars: the Syro-Anatolian and the 
Egyptian schools’, Of God(9, Trees, Kings and Scholars: Neo-Assyrian and Related 
Studies in Honour of Simo Parpola, Studia Orientalia 106, ed. M. Luukko, S. Svãrd, 
and R. Mattila, Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 221-38. 

Raulwing, P and Clutton-Brock, J., 2009. ‘The Buhen horse fifty years after its 
discovery (1958-2008)’, Journal of Egyptian History 2: 1-106. 

Rautman, A.E. (ed.), 2000. Reading the Body: Representations and Remains in the 
Archaeological Record, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Rawlins D. and Pickering, K., 2001. ‘Astronomical orientation of the pyramids’, Nature 
412: 699. 

Ray, J.D., 1986. The emergence of writing in Egypt, WA 17/3: 307-16. 

Rehren, T., Pusch, E.B. and Herold, A., 2001. ‘Qantir-Piramesses and the 


183 


Bibliography 


organization of the Egyptian glass industry’, The Social Context of Technological 
Change: Egypt and the Near East, 1650-1550 BC, ed. A.J. Shortland. Oxford: 
Oxbow, 223-8. 

Reisner, G.A., 1928. “The empty sarcophagus of the mother of Cheops’, Bulletin of the 
Museum of Fine Arts 26: 75-89. 

Reisner, G.A., 1931. Mycerinus: The Temples of the Third Pyramid, Cambridge MA: 
HUP 

Renfrew, C.A., 1986. Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe’, 
The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, ed. A. Appadurai, 
Cambridge, CUB, 141-68. 

Reymond, E.A.E., 1976. 4 Medical Book from Crocodilopolis, Vienna: Verlag Brüder 
Hollinek. 

Rice, M., 1990. Egypt’s Making: The Origins of Ancient Egypt 5000-2000 BC, London: 
Routledge. 

Ritner, R.K., 1989. ‘Horus on the crocodiles: a juncture of religion and magic in late 
dynastic Egypt’, Religion and Philosophy in Ancient Egypt, ed. W.K. Simpson, New 
Haven: Yale Egyptological Seminar, 103-16. 

Ritner, R.K., 1993. The Mechanics of Ancient Egyptian Magical Practice, Studies in 
Ancient Oriental Civilizations 54, Chicago: Oriental Institute. 

Ritner, R.K., 2000. Innovations and adaptations in ancient Egyptian medicine’, JNES 
59/2: 107-17. 

Ritner, R.K., 2001. ‘Magic in medicine’, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt, ed. 
D.B. Redford, Oxford and New York: OUB, 326-9. 

Robins, G. and Shute, C.C., 1987. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, London, BMP. 

Robson, E., 2001. ‘Technology in society: three textual case studies from Late Bronze 
Age Mesopotamia’, The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near 
East, 1650-1550 BC, ed. A.J. Shortland, Oxford: Oxbow, 39-57. 

Roehrig, C.H., 2005. ‘Glass’, Hatshepsut from Queen to Pharaoh, ed. C.H. Roehrig, R. 
Dreyfuss and C.A. Keller, New York: MMA, 67-9. 

Rogers, E.M., 1983. Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd edn, New York: The Free Press. 

Romer, J., 2007. The Great Pyramid: Ancient Egypt Revisited, Cambridge, CUP. 

Rossi, C., 2004. Architecture and Mathematics in Ancient Egypt, Cambridge, CUP. 

Roth, A.M., 1992. ‘The psS-kf and the “opening of the mouth” ceremony: a ritual of 
birth and rebirth’, JEA 78: 113-47. 

Roth, A.M., 1993. Fingers, stars and the “opening of the mouth”, JEA 79: 57-80. 

Rowlands, M.]., 1976. The Organization of Middle Bronze Age Metalworking, Oxford: 
BAR. 

Sauneron, S., 1989. Un traité égyptien d ophiologie: papyrus du Brooklyn Museum no 
47.218.48 et .835, Cairo: IFAO. 

Sãve-Söderbergh, T., 1951. The Hyksos rule in Egypt’, JEA 37: 59-60. 

Scarre, C., 1994. “The meaning of death: funerary beliefs and the prehistorian’, The 
Ancient Mind: Elements of Cognitive Archaeology, ed. C. Renfrew and E. Zubrow. 
Cambridge: CUB 75-82. 


184 


Bibliography 


Schmandt-Besserat, D., 1978. ‘An early recording system in Egypt and the ancient 
Near East’, Immortal Egypt, ed. D. Schmandt-Besserat, Malibu: Undena, 5-12. 

Schmandt-Besserat, D., 1981. From tokens to tablets: a re-evaluation of the so-called 
“numerical tablets”, Visible Language 15/4: 321-44. 

Schmandt-Besserat, D., 1992. Before Writing: from Counting to Cuneiform, Austin TX: 
University of Texas Press. 

Schmandt-Besserat, D., 1996. How Writing Came About, Austin TX: University of 
‘Texas Press. 

Schofield, L. and Parkinson, R., 1994. ‘Of helmets and heretics: a possible Egyptian 
representation of Mycenaean warriors on a papyrus from el-Amarna’, Annual of the 
British School at Athens 89: 157-70. 

Schulman, A.R., 1980. ‘Chariots, chariotry and the Hyksos’, Journal of the Society for 
the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 10: 105-53. 

Schulman, A., 1988. ‘Hittites, helmets and Amarna: Akhenaten’s first Hittite war’, 
Akhenaten Temple Project IT, ed. D. Redford, Toronto: Akhenaten Temple Project, 
54-79. 

Scott, N.E., 1942. ‘Egyptian cubit rods’, Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin n.s. 1: 70-5. 

de Selincourt, A. (tr.), 1954. Herodotus: The Histories, rev. J. Marincola, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 

Serpico, M. and White, R., 2000. ‘Oil, fat and wax’, Ancient Egyptian Materials and 
Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson and 1. Shaw, Cambridge: CUR, 390-429. 

Sethe, K., 1902. Imhotep, der Asklepios der Aegypter, Leipzig: Hinrichs. 

Shaltout, M. and Belmonte, J.A., 2008. ‘On the orientation of ancient Egyptian temples 
(4) Epilogue in Serabit el-Khadim and overview’, Journal for the History of Astronomy 
39: 182-1. 

Shaw, I., 1996. ‘Akhetaton ¬ the city of one god’, Royal Cities ofthe Biblical World, ed. 
J. Goodnick Westenholz, Jerusalem: Bible Lands Museum, 83-112. 

Shaw, I., 2000. ‘Sifting the spoil heaps: excavation techniques from Peet to Pendlebury 
at el-Amarna’, Studies dedicated to Prof. H.S. Smith, ed. M.A. Leahy and J. Tait, 
London: EES, 273-82. 

Shaw, I., 2001. ‘Egyptians, Hyksos and military technology: causes, effects or catalysts?’, 
The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near East, 1650-1350 BC, 
ed. A. Shortland, Oxford: Oxbow, 59-72. 

Shaw, I., 2004. Identity and occupation: how did individuals define themselves and 
their work in the Egyptian New Kingdom?, Invention and Innovation: The Social 
Context of Technological Change, ed. J. Bourriau and J. Phillips, Oxford: Oxbow, 12-24. 

Shaw, I., 2008. “A royal harem town of the New Kingdom: new fieldwork at Medinet 
el-Gurob’, Queens of Egypt, ed. C. Ziegler, Paris: Somogy Art Publishers, 104-15. 

Shaw, I., 2009.  Non-textual marks and the Twelfth-Dynasty dynamics of centre and 
periphery: a case-study of potmarks at the Gebel el-Asr gneiss quarries’, Non-textual 
Marking Systems, Writing and Pseudo Script from Prehistory to Present Times, ed. P. 
Andrassy, J. Budka and F Kammerzell, Lingua Aegyptia —- Studia Monographica 
No. 8, Göttingen: Lingua Aegyptia, 69-82. 


185 


Bibliography 


Shaw, I., 2010a. Hatnub: Quarrying Travertine in Ancient Egypt, London: EES. 

Shaw, I., 2010b. ‘Socio-economic and iconographic contexts for Egyptian military 
technology in the east Mediterranean: the knowledge economy and “technology 
transfer” in Late Bronze Age warfare’, The Knowledge Economy and Technological 
Capabilities: Egypt, the Near East and the Mediterranean 2nd Millennium BC-1st 
Millennium AD. Proceedings of a Conference held at the Maison de la Chimie Paris, 
France 9-10 December 2005, ed. M. Wissa, Barcelona: Aula Orientalis, 77-85. 

Shaw, I., 2011. ‘New fieldwork at the Medinet el-Gurob New Kingdom settlement: 
investigating a harem palace town in the Faiyum (summary of the 2009-10 seasons)’, 
Achievements and Problems of Modern Egyptology, Moscow 29 September-2 October 
2009, ed. G. Belova, Moscow: Russian Academy of Sciences. 

Shennan, S., 2002. Genes, Memes and Human History: Darwinian Archaeology and 
Cultural Evolution, London and New York: Thames and Hudson. 

Shirakawa, E., 2006. ‘Choice of vocabularies: wordplay in ancient Egypt, Current 
Research in Egyptology 2004, ed. R.J. Dann, Oxford: Oxbow. 

Shorter, A.W., 1936. ‘A magical ostracon’, JEA 22: 165-8. 

Shortland, A.J., 2001. The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near 
East, 1650-1550 BC, Oxford: Oxbow. 

Shortland, A.J., 2004. Hopeful monsters: invention and innovation in the archaeological 
record’, Invention and Innovation: The Social Context of Technological Change 2, 
Egypt, the Aegean and the Near East 1650-1150 BC, ed. J. Bourriau and J. Phillips, 
Oxford: Oxbow, 1-11. 

Shortland, A.J., 2007. Who were the glassmakers? Status, theory and method in mid- 
second millennium glass production’, Oxford Journal of Archaeology 26: 261-74. 

Shute, C., 2001. Mathematics’, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt II, ed. D.B. 
Redford, Oxford and New York: OUR, 348-51. 

Sillar, B. and Tite, M., 2000. The challenge of “technological choices” for materials 
science approaches in archaeology’, Archaeometry 42/1: 2-20. 

Silverman, D., 1991. Divinity and deities in ancient Egypt, in Religion in Ancient 
Egypt, ed. B.E. Shafer, Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 7-87. 

Skinner, FG., 1954. ‘Measures and weights’, 4 History of Technology I, ed. C. Singer, 
E.J. Holmyard and A.R. Hall, Oxford: OUR, 774-84. 

Smith, H.S., 1972. ‘Society and settlement in ancient Egypt’, Man, Settlement and 
Urbanism, ed. P. Ucko, R. Tringham and G.W. Dimbleby, London: Duckworth, 
705-19. 

Smith, H.S. and Smith, A., 1976. ‘A reconsideration of the Kamose texts’, ZAS 103: 
48-76. 

Smith, S., 1969. ‘Babylonian time reckoning’, Iraq 31: 74-81. 

Smith, W.S., 1981. The Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt, 2nd edn, Harmondsworth: 
Pelican. 

Snape, S.R. and Tyldesley, J., 1983. Two Egyptian flint knapping scenes’, Lithics 4: 
46-7. 

Snodgrass, A.M., 1980. ‘Iron and early metallurgy in the Mediterranean’, The Coming of 


186 


Bibliography 


the Age of Iron, ed. T.A. Wertime and J.D. Muhly, New Haven, CN: Yale University 
Press, 335-74. 

Soukiassian, G., 1997. ‘A governor's palace at ‘Ayn Asil, Dakhla Oasis’, Egyptian 
Archaeology 11: 15-17. 

Spalinger, A.J., 1982. Aspects of the Military Documents of the Ancient Egyptians, New 
Haven and London: YUP. 

Spalinger, A.J., 1995. Some remarks on the epagomenal days in ancient Egypt, JNES 
54: 33-47. 

Spalinger, A.J., 2005. War in Ancient Egypt: The New Kingdom, Oxford: Blackwell. 

Sparks, R., 2001. ‘Stone vessel workshops in the Levant: luxury products of a 
cosmopolitan age’, The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near 
East, 1650-1550 BC, ed. A.J. Shortland, Oxford: Oxbow Books, 93-112. 

Spence, K., 2000. ‘Ancient Egyptian chronology and the astronomical orientation of 
pyramids’, Nature 408: 320-4. 

Spence, K., 2010. ‘Establishing direction in early Egyptian burials and monumental 
architecture: “measurement” and the spatial link with the “other”, The Archaeology 
of Measurement: Comprehending Heaven, Earth and Time in Ancient Societies, ed. 1. 
Morley and C. Renfrew, Cambridge: CUB, 170-9. 

Spencer, P., 2004. Digging diary 2003’, EA 24: 25-9. 

Spratt, D.A., 1989. Innovation theory made plain’, What’s New? 4 Closer Look at The 
Process of Innovation, ed. S.E. van der Leeuw and R. Torrence, London: Unwin 
Hyman, 245-57. 

Steiner, R.C., 1992. Northwest Semitic incantations in an Egyptian medical papyrus of 
the fourteenth century BCE’, JNES 51: 191-200. 

Sternberg-el-Hotabi, H., 1988. ‘Balamierungsritual pBoulaq 3, Rituale und 
Beschwörungen 2, ed. C. Butterweck, Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus Mohn. 
Stevens, A. and Ecclestone, M., 2007. ‘Craft production and technology’, The Egyptian 

World, ed. T. Wilkinson, London and New York: Routledge, 146-59. 

Stevenson, A., 2009. ‘Palettes’, UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology, ed. W. Wendrich, 
Los Angeles. http://digital2.library.ucla.edu/viewItem.do ?ark=21198/zz001nf6c0 
Stocks, D., 1986. ‘Egyptian technology I: stone vessel manufacture’, Popular 

Archaeology, May 1986: 14-18. 

Stocks, D., 1993. ‘Making stone vessels in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt’, Antiquity 
67: 596-603. 

Stocks, D., 1997. ‘Derivation of ancient Egyptian faience core and glaze materials’, 
Antiquity 71: 179-82. 

Stocks, D., 2003a. Experiments in Egyptian Archaeology: Stoneworking Technology in 
Ancient Egypt. London: Routledge. 

Stocks, D., 2003b. Tmmutable laws of friction: preparing and fitting stone blocks into 
the Great Pyramid at Giza’, Antiquity 77: 572-8. 

Struve, W.W., 1930. Mathematischer Papyrus des Staatlichen Museums der schönen Kiüinste 
in Moskau, Studien und Quellen zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und 
Physik, part A, vol. 1, Berlin: Springer. 


187 


Bibliography 


Thomsen, C.]J., 1836. Ledetraad til Nordisk Oldkyndighed, Copenhagen: Royal Danish 
Society of Antiquities (tr. Lord Ellesmere, 1848, 4 Guide to Northern Archaeology, 
London: James Bain). 

Tillmann, A., 1992. Die Steinartefukte des dynastischen Agypten, dargestellt am Beispiel 
der Inventare aus Tell el-Dab’a und Qantir, Tübingen: unpublished PhD thesis. 
Tiiradritti, F., (ed.), 1998. Egyptian Treasures from the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, 

Vercelli: White Star. 

Tylecote, R.F., 1992. 4 History of Metallurgy, London: Institute of Materials. 

Tylor, J.J., 1896. Wall Drawings and Monuments of El Kab: The Tomb of Sebeknekht, 
London: Bernard Quaritch. 

Vallance, J., 2000. ‘Doctors in the library: the strange tale of Apollonius the bookworm 
and other stories’, The Library of Alexandria: Centre of Learning in the Ancient World, 
ed. R. MacLeod, London and New York: I1.B. Tauris, 95-113. 

van den Brink, E.C.M., 1992. ‘Corpus and numerical evaluation of the “Thinite” 
potmarks’, The Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to Michael Allen Hofman, 1944- 
1990, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams, Oxford: Oxbow, 265-96. 

Vandier, J., 1952. Manuel d'archeologie egyptienne I: Les époques de formation, Paris: 
Picard. 

Van Dijk, J., 2000. “The Amarna period and the later New Kingdom’, The Oxford 
History of Ancient Egypt, ed. 1. Shaw, Oxford: OUR, 265-307. 

Van Driel-Murray, C., 2000. ‘Leatherwork and skin products’, Ancient Egyptian 
Materials and Technology, ed. PT. Nicholson and 1. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 299- 
319. 

van Koppen, F. and Radner, K., 2009. ‘Ein Tontafelfragment aus der diplomatischen 
Korrespondenz der Hyksosherrscher mit Babylonien’, Agypten und Levante 19: 115-19. 

van Walsem, R., 1978-79. The psS-kf: an investigation of an ancient Egyptian funerary 
instrument’, OMRO 59: 193-249. 

Velde, H. te, 1970. ‘The god Heka in Egyptian theology’, Jaarbericht van het 
Voorasiatisch-Egyptisch Genootschap ‘Ex Oriente Lux’ 21: 175-86. 

Vermeersch, P. and Paulissen, E., 1997. ‘Extensive Middle Palaeolithic chert extraction 
in the Qena area (Egypt), Man and Flint, Proceedings of the VIIth International 
Flint Symposium, Warsaw, September 1995, Warsaw: Institute of Archaeology and 
Ethnology, Polish Academy of Sciences, 133-42. 

Vogelsang-Eastwood, G., 2000. ‘Textiles’, Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, 
ed. PT. Nicholson and I. Shaw, Cambridge: CUB, 268-98. 

Von Damow, E., 2004. Canaanite in cuneiform’, Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 124/4: 641-74. 

von Staden, H., 1989. Herophilus: The Art of Medicine in Early Alexandria, Cambridge: 
CUP 

Wachsmann, S., 1981. The ships of the Sea Peoples’, International Journal of Nautical 
Archaeology 10: 187-220. 

Warburton, D., 2003. Macroeconomics from the Beginning: The General Theory, Ancient 
Markets, and the Role of Interest, Neuchûtel, Switzerland: Recherches et Publications. 


188 


Bibliography 


Warren, P., 1995. Minoan Crete and Pharaonic Egypt’, Egypt, the Aegean and the Levant: 
Interconnections in the Second Millennium BC, ed. W.V. Davies and L. Schofield, 
London: BMP, 1-18. 

Weeks, K., 1976-8. ‘Studies of Papyrus Ebers’, Bulletin de PInstitut {Egypte 58-9: 292-9. 

Weigall, A.E.P., 1908. Weights and Balances, Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes 
du Musée du Caire, Cairo: IFAO. 

Wendorf, F., 1968. ‘Site 117: a Nubian final paleolithic graveyard near Jebel Sahaba, 
Sudan’, The Prehistory of Nubia, ed. F. Wendorf, Dallas: Fort Bergwin Research 
Center and SMU Press, 954-95. 

Wendorf, F. and Schild, R., 2001. Holocene Settlement of the Egyptian Sahara I: The 
Archaeology of Nabta Playa, New York: Kluwer Academic. 

Wendorf, F., Schild, R. and Zedeno, N., 1996. “A late Neolithic megalith complex in the 
Eastern Sahara: a preliminary report, Interregional Contacts in the Later Prehistory 
of Northeastern Africa, ed. L. Krzyzaniak, K. Kroeper and M. Kobusiewicz, Poznan: 
Poznan Archaeological Museum, 125-32. 

Wengrow, D., 2006. The Archaeology of Early Egypt: Social Transformations in North- 
East Africa, 10,000 to 2650 BC, Cambridge: CUP. 

Werschkun, C., 2011. Resource Procurement and Management in Egyptian Settlements of 
the Old Kingdom, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Liverpool. 

Westendorf, W., 1966. Papyrus Edwin Smith: Ein medizinisches Lehrbuch aus dem Alten 
Agypten, Berne and Stuttgart: Hans Huber. 

Western, A.C. and McLeod, W., 1995. “Woods used in Egyptian bows and arrows’, 
JEA 81: 77-94. 

Wheeler, N.F., 1935. ‘Pyramids and their purpose III: pyramid mysticism and 
mystification’, Antiquity 9: 5-21. 

White, L., 1962. Medieval Archaeology and Social Change, Oxford, OUP. 

Wiebach-Koepke, S., 2003. Phûinomenologie der Bewegungsabliufe im Jenseitskonzept der 
Unterweltbiicher Amduat und Pfortenbuch und der liturgischen Sonnenlitanei, Agypten 
und Altes Testament 55, Wiesbaden: Harassowitz. 

Wild, H., 1966. Le tombeau de Ti, fasc. III. Cairo: IFAO. 

Wildung, D., 1977. Egyptian Saints: Deification in Pharaonic Egypt, New York: New 
York University Press. 

Wilhelm, G., 1984. ‘Zur Palãographie der in Ãgypten geschribenen Keilschriftbriefe’, 
SAK 11: 643-53. 

Wilkinson, C. (ed.), 2008. The Observer Book of Invention, London, Observer Books. 

Williams, A.R. and Maxwell-Hyslop, K.R., 1976. ‘Ancient steel from Egypt, Journal 
of Archaeological Science 3: 283-305. 

Wiseman, D.J., 1955. ‘Assyrian writing-boards’, Iraq 17: 3-15. 

Wreszinski, W., 1909. Der grosse medizinische Papyrus des Berliner Museums (Pap. Berl. 
3038), Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs. 

Wreszinski, W., 1912. Der Londoner medizinische Papyrus (Brit. Museum nr. 10,059) 
und der Papyrus Hearst in Transkription: Übersetzung und Kommentar, Leipzig: J.C. 
Hinrichs. 


189 


Bibliography 


Wreszinski, W., 1913. Der Papyrus Ebers: Umschrift, Ubersetzung und Kommentar, 
Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs. 

Wreszinski, W., 1935. Atlas zur altûgyptischen Kulturgeschichte II, Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs. 

Yadin, Y., 1963. The Art of Warfure in Biblical Lands I, New York, Toronto and London: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Yoffee, N., 1995. ‘Political economy in early Mesopotamian states’, Annual Review of 
Anthropology 24: 281-311. 

Zaba, Z., 1953. L orientation astronomique dans Tancienne Egyptee, et la precession de 
[axe du monde, Prague: xx. 

Zaccagnini, C., 1983. ‘Patterns of mobility among ancient Near Eastern craftsmen’, 
JNES 42: 245-64. 

Zerubavel, E., 1977. The French Republican calendar: a case study in the sociology of 
time’, American Sociological Review 42: 868-77. 


190 


Index 


References to pages with illustrations are in italic. 


Amenemhat (Theban official) 161-2 
Amenhotep I (king) 161 
Amenhotep III (king) 93, 120, 162 
Amenhotep son of Hapu (official) 12 
Amaratian (Naqada D 5 

amulets 47, 80, 141 

Amun 35 

Amunedjeh (official) 103 

Anatolia 112, 123 

Annals of Thutmose III 88, 103 
archaism 52, 153 

archery equipment 105 

Archimedes 12, 21 

armour 106, 108, 116-17, 119-20 
arrow 97, 104-5, 108 

art 26, 144, 146 

ash (Fraxinus excelsior) 99, 104-5 
Ashurbanipal (king) 36, 37, 88 
Asklepieion 45 

Asklepios 45 

Assyria 34-7, 52, 88-9, 103-4, 123, 154 
astronomy 13, 69-71, 160-6 

Aswan 7, 66 

Ayn Asil 35 

Ayurveda 42-3 


Babylon 37, 88, 107, 165 
Badari 82 

Badarian Period xiii, 5, 63, 82 
Baket II (BH15; official) 100 


Abu Ghurob 72 

Abu Simbel 117, 163 

Abusir 73, 100 

Abydos 7, 27-9, 59, 61, 80, 107, 160, 165 

acacia 99, 104, 108 

accountancy 7, 16, 27, 29, 31 

Achaemenid empire 54, 123, 126 

Acheulean tradition 55 

Adad-Nirari III (king) 35-6 

administration 15-16, 31, 135, 157 

adzes 56 

Aegean archaeology 113, 118, 125 

agriculture 135, 144 

agrimi (Cretan wild goat) 105 

Ahanakht (official) 49 

Ahhotpe (queen) 95 

Ahmose (king) 95 

Ahmose son of Ibana (official) 107 

Akhenaten (king) 116 

Akhethotep (official) 50 

Akkadian 32, 34, 107 

alabaster gypsum 64, 65 

Alexandria 11, 45 

alkali 85 

Amarna (site) 33-5, 65, 86-7, 90, 110, 
120, 121, 127-9, 131, 132-3, 135- 
49 

Amarna letters 88, 93, 114 

Amarna Period 84 

Amenemhat (BHZ2; official) 56, 57, 100 


191 


Index 


Chester Beatty VI Papyrus 42 

childbirth 83 

China 24, 31, 42-3 

chisels 64 

cippi of Horus 47 

circulation 41, 43, 45, 49 

clappers 51 

clay 34, 71 

climate 78 

clocks 161-2, 164 

coffins 80, 102, 131, 163-4 

construction 15, 21-2, 41, 68-76, 157 

copper 5, 7, 56, 65, 89-90, 91, 93, 99, 
101, 108, 117, 123-5, 133, 142, 
153, 157, 158 

corbel-vaulting 74 

cotton 8 

cows 59 

craftwork 14 

craftworkers 36, 38, 63, 97-100, 117, 
127-8, 133-8, 0 

Crete 24, 121 

Crocodilopolis Medical Book (P. Vienna 
6257( 52-4 

cubit 157, 158, 162 

cuneiform 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 88, 107, 
120 

curses 45 

Cyprus 125, 155 


Dakhla Oasis 35 

De compositione medicamentorum 40 

decorum (art) 26, 75-6 

deification 12, 45 

Deir el-Ballas 127-9 

Deir el-Bersha 65, 66 

Deir el-Medina 134, 157 

Delta region 59, 116 

demotic texts 17, 54, 165 

Dendera 45, 56, 165 

diplomatic relations 32-7, 107, 112, 113- 
15, 119-2 

disease 43-4, 50 


192 


Ballas 78 

basalt 56 

basketry 4-5, 8, 144 

battle reliefs 108, 110, 112, 114, 121 

Beni Hasan 35, 56, 57, 100 

Bent Pyramid 22 

Bes 45, 147 

blood circulation 41, 43, 45, 49 

Boghazköy see Hattuša 

bone-working 4, 93, 98-9, 101, 108 

Book of Gates 45 

Book of Nut 165 

Book of the Dead 52 

Book of Thoth 12 

Borchardt, Ludwig 129, 133, 141-2 

borers 64, 65 

bows 92, 97, 100, 104-5, 108, 117-18 

brewing 4, 137 

Britain 97 

bronze 106, 123, 158 

Bronze Age 32, 37-8, 60, 85, 88, 91, 94, 
102, 110-15, 118-19, 121-3, 129, 
150-1, 154 

Brooklyn Papryus (Brooklyn Museum 
47.218.48( 42, 50-1 

Bubastis 28 

Buhen 102-3 

bullae 27 

burial 78 

butchery 58, 142 

Buto 28 


Canaan 119 

canopic equipment 82-3 

Cape Gelidonya 87 

car 109 

Carlsberg VIII Papyrus 40 
catapult 106 
Caton-Thompson, Gertrude 64 
cavalry 103-4 

chariots 92-103, 108, 115, 118 
chemical analysis 85, 89-90 
chert 55, 65 


Index 


frit 7, 85, 13 
funerary goods 27, 59-62, 67, 81, 84 
furnaces 7 


furniture 134, 140, 144, 147, 149 


Galen 40, 45 

Gaza 102 

Gebel el-Asr 30 

Gebel Gulab 66 

geometry 19-22 

Giza 49, 50, 63, 66, 69, 71-2, 75, 82, 84 

glass 5, 8, 9, 77, 84-91, 99, 101, 113, 
131, 135, 153, 5 

glue 99 

gneiss 56, 66 

goats 59 

gold 5, 7, 8, 59, 99, 110, 124, 125, 137, 
158 

grammar 26, 52 

granaries 149 

granite 56, 66, 68, 70, 74 

granodiorite 56 

Great Pyramid 22, 69-71, 74, 75 

Greece 11, 14, 21, 25, 32, 49, 69, 114 

Greek science 11-13, 39-40, 42-3, 44 

greywacke 59, 62 

Gurob 86, 127-9 

gynaecology 40-2, 50 

gypsum plaster 99 


hammer 125-6 

hand-axes 55, 56 

harvesting 56 

Hathor (goddess) 45, 165 
Hatnub 49, 63, 65, 66 
Hatshepsut (queen) 98, 102 
Hattuša (Boghazköy) 34, 88, 115-16 
Hattusilis II (king) 117 
healers see physicians 

Hearst Papyrus 42, 43 

Heit el-Ghurab 63 

Heka, Hu and Sia (gods) 46, 52 
Hellenistic Period 106 


dissection 45, 50 
Djadjaemankh (fictional magician) 46 
Djedi (fictional magician) 46 
Djer (king) 160 

Djoser (king) 47, 48, 15 
dogs 59 

dolerite 56 

Draconis 71 

dream interpretation 36-7 
drilling 56, 63, 64, 108, 153 
dyed textiles 7 


Early Dynastic Period 7, 28, 29-31, 57-9, 
61-2, 68, 70, 75, 80 

Ebers Papyrus 39-40, 43, 47, 49 

ebony 59 

economics 16, 134, 138-9, 149-50, 153-4 

Edfu 25, 56, 70, 75, 164 

Edwin Smith Medical Papyrus 41, 52 

Egypt Exploration Society (EES) 143 

Egyptian Mathematical Leather Roll 17 

Elephantine 56, 67-8 

Elkab 107 

elm (Ulmus minor) 99 

Erasistratus 45 

Esarhaddon (king) 35, 36 

ethno-archaeology 3, 64, 134, 152 

evisceration $0, 82-3 

exchange (of crafts and craftworkers) 33- 
8, 52-4, 84-7, 98-9, 107, 110, 113, 
117, 119-22 

experimental archaeology 64, 69, 73 


faience 5, 6, 7, 85, 91, 99, 101, 108, 113, 
131, 145-6, 148, 13 

Faiyum 64 

field maple (Acer campestre) 99 

figurines 46-7, 51, 147 

First Intermediate Period xiii, 7, 49, 114 

fishtail knives 59, 60, 83-4, 154 

flint 55, 57, 65, 83, 147-8 

food preparation 56, 58, 147 

fractions 19, 41 


193 


Index 


Jordan 90 


Kadero 57 

Kaemheset (official) 95 

Kahun Medical Papyrus (UC 32057) 40, 
41 

Kamose (king) 95, 103 

Karnak Temple 71, 72, 88, 98, 116, 162 

Kenamun (TT93; official) 88, 91 

Kerma culture 103 

Khafra (king) 66-7, 69 

Khartoum 57 

Khasekhemwy (king) 59, 70, 164 

Khety (fictional ruler) 114 

Khnumhotep III (BH3; official) 3 

Khufu (king) 46, 69, 71, 82 

Khyan (king) 102 

kilns 87 

kingship 62, 94, 111-12, 113, 114 

knapping 56-61 

knives 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 83 

Kom Ombo 53, 54 


labour organisation 36, 68, 113, 149 

Lahun 18, 40 

lapis lazuli 88 

Late Period xiv, 8, 45, 124-6, 157, 164 

lead 5 

leather 17, 56, 98-100, 117, 129, 135, 
145 

lime 8, 85 

limestone 56, 59, 64, 116 

linen 8, 79, 80, 81, 82, 102 

Lisht 72 

literacy 25-6, 31, 144, 146 

literary texts 33, 46, 51, 135 

London Medical Papyrus 35, 42, 52 

‘Lord Aberdeen’s Black Stone’ (British 
Museum WA 91027) 35 

loom 5, 7, 9 

Lower Egypt 6 


Maat-hor-neferu-ra (princess) 117 


194 


helmet 115, 116, 120, 120-1 

Hermopolis Magna 66 

Herodotus 50, 80, 81 

Herophilus 45 

Heryshefnakht (official) 49 

Hesyra (S2405; official) 47, 48 

Hetepheres I (queen) 82-3, 84 

Hierakonpolis 4, 5, 6, 59, 61, 62, 70, 80, 
82, 164 

hieratic texts 15, 17, 79 

hieroglyphic signs 28 

hieroglyphic writing 3, 24-38, 144, 146, 
147, 152-3 

hippopotami 59 

hippos vessel 118 

Hittites 108-9, 110, 113-17, 121-2, 125 

Holocene 37 

Homo erectus 55 

horses 95, 97, 101, 110, 142-3 

Horus 70, 75, 164, 165 

Horus-the-elder 33, 54 

houses 8, 132, 135-8, 144, 149 

Hurrian 120, 

Huya (official) 132 

Hyksos 95, 97, 100, 102, 104, 107, 108 


ibex 59 

Iby (official) 64 

Imhotep (official; god) 12, 45, 75 
Inca 30 

Indus Valley 24 

Instruction to King Merikare 114 
Intef (TT386; oficial) 95, 96 
Iran 140 

Iraq 27-8 

iron 8, 83, 110, 122-6, 155 

Iron Age 35, 60, 102, 110-26 
irrigation 4 

Iry (official) 49 

Ishtar 35 

Tuty (official) 133 

ivory 51, 84, 93, 99, 101, 120, 160 


Index 


mines 55 

Minoan 90 

Minoan language 35 

Mitanni 85, 93, 120 

Moscow Mathematical Papyrus 17-18, 21 

Mostagedda 82 

mud-brick 5-6, 8, 28, 68-9, 72, 102 

mummification 5, 7, 8, 49-50, 59, 77-84, 
152-3 

Mycenae, Mycenaean 120-1 

mythology 12, 33, 46, 82, 163-6 


Nabta Playa-Kiseiba region 37, 163 

Naga ed-Dêr 59 

Naqada 61, 78, 158 

Naqada Period 4-6, 28, 29, 57, 59-61, 

81, 83 

Narmer Palette 62 

natron 77, 80, 82, 89-90 

Nazlet Khater 4 

Nefer and Ka-hay (officials) 80 

Neferirkare (king) 73 

Neolithic Period 4, 26, 56, 57, 82, 163 

New Kingdom 8, 15, 22, 34-5, 40-2, 45, 
56, 66, 79, 86-8, 92-5, 106, 121, 
127, 134-8, 141, 17 

nickel 125 

Nile 73 

Nilo-Saharan languages 37 

Nimrud 35 

Nineveh 88 

Nubia 98, 103, 104 

numerical system 18-19 

Nut (goddess) 163 

Nyuserra (king) 73 


offering formulae 84 

officials 15, 32-7, 83, 113, 135, 137, 158 

oils 84, 91 

Old Kingdom 7, 16, 35, 46, 49, 52, 56, 
62, 67, 69-71, 73, 82-4 

onomastica (word-lists) 14-15, 33 

Onomasticon of Amenope (GolenischeffF 


195 


mace-heads 62 

Maghara Abu Aziz 65 

magic (HKA) 39, 44, 45-7, 51, 79 

magnesia 85, 90 

Maiherpri (KV36; official) 105 

Maiunehes 136 

Mali 32 

Malkata 86 

Mariette, A. 47 

marl 30 

Marxist theory 140 

mass production 80, 91, 149 

mastaba-tombs 22, 83 

Mathematical Leather Roll (BM EA 
10250) 7 

mathematical texts 16-21 

mathematics 7, 13, 16-23 

Maya culture 32, 139 

medical equipment 47, 53, 54 

medical terminology 41-5 

medical texts 7, 39-43, 50-1 

medical titulary 42, 47-51 

medicine 13, 39-54, 154 

Medinet Habu 9% 115, 118-19 

Megiddo 114 

Meidum 22, 72-3, 80, 81, 83 

Meir 63, 64 

Memphis 40, 65, 67, 127, 147 

Memphite Theology 16 

Menkaura (king) 66-7, 69 

Menna (TT69; official) 158, 159 

mercenary 119 

Merenptah (king) 162 

Mereruka (official) 64 

Mesaeed 59 

Mesoamerica 31, 139 

Mesopotamia 18, 24, 26, 27, 28, 31, 36, 
39, 89-90, 123, 125, 5 

metal-working 5, 7, 8, 90-1, 98, 122-6, 
142, 145-6, 148, 153 

Middle Kingdom 7, 14, 18, 40, 46, 63, 
88, 96, 101 

military 41, 93, 98, 103, 110 


Index 


19, 20, 21 
Tomb Robbery Papyri 135-6 
Pawa (oficial) 145 

Peet, Eric 134, 136, 140-1 

Pella 90 

Pendlebury, John 141 

Pepy I (king) 73 

Pepyankh (official) 63, 64 

Persia 52, 123 

Peseshet (official) 50 

Petosiris 10 

Petrie, W.M.E. 18, 19, 22, 69, 78, 80, 81, 
83, 86-7, 126, 131, 2 

petrographic analysis 34 

pharmacy 39, 41, 42, 44, 47, 51, 54 

Phoenicia 118 

physicians 39, 47, 49-51 

picks 56 

pigment 7 

Piramesse see Qantir 

plant ash alkali 89-90 

plaster 80, 141 

Plato 16, 25, 32 

plum-wood 99 

population 107, 120, 135-6, 140, 143-4, 
152 

potash 85 

potassium oxide 90 

potmarks 29-30 

pottery 4, 30, 37, 41, 68, 147, 158 

pottery-making 7, 29, 38 

pounders 56 

prayers 37, 44, 79 

Predynastic Period xiii, 4-6, 25, 27-31, 
57-61, 62, 68, 78, 83, 5 

priests 49, 135, 136-7, 143, 145, 163 

Protodynastic Period 6, 61-2 

Ptah (god) 16 

Ptahhotep (official) 49, 56, S8 

Ptahshepses (official) 100 

Ptolemaic Period xiv, 8, 10, 12, 17, 44-5, 
123, 126, 161 

Ptolemy II (king) 45 


Papyrus) 15 

‘opening of the mouth’ 83 
Orion 164 
Osiris (god) 81-2, 165 
osteopathy 50 
ostraca 15, 17, 45, 46, 134, 142 

O. Armytage 6-9 (ostraca) 45 

O. Colin Campbell (ostracon) 45 
oxen 95 


paint 80 
Palaeolithic Period xiii, 4, 4 55-6, 78 
palettes 26, 61-2 
Panehsy (official) 145 
papyri 6, 15, 17-18, 21, 35, 40-3, 46, 50- 
4, 72, 92, 93, 99, 115, 127, 135-7, 
148 
Edwin Smith Medical Papyrus 41, 52 
London Medical Papyrus 35, 42, 52 
Moscow Mathematical Papyrus 17-18, 
21 
P. Anastasi I 15, 72, 92, 99 
P Anastasi IV 93 
P Berlin 3027 42 
P. Berlin 3033 (Westcar Papyrus) 46 
P Berlin 3038 41-2, 43 
P BM 10068 135-7, 148 
P. Boulaq III 79 
P. Brooklyn 47.218.48 42, 50-1 
P. Carlsberg VIII 40 
P. Chester Beatty VI 42 
P Golenischeff 15 
P. Harris I 115 
P. Hearst 42, 43 
P. Lansing 127 
P Louvre 5.158 79 
P Ramesseum IV-V 40 
P. UC 32057 (Kahun Medical papyrus) 
40, 41 
P. Vienna 6257 (Crocodilopolis 
Medical Book) 52-4 
P Wilbour 135-6 
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus 17-18, 


196 


Index 


Sah (god) 164 

Sahara 37 

Sahura (king) 73 

Samaria 104 

sandstone 7 

Saqqara 4, 7, 8, 41, 45, 47, 49, 56, 58, 
64, 71, 73, 80, 96, 99, 00 

sarcophagus 82 

Sargon II (king) 35 

Satyrical Letter (P. Anastasi I, BM 
EA1024) 15, 72 

science 11, 39 

Scorpion (king) 28 

scorpion stings 42, 50- 51 

scrapers 61, 64 

scribal education 15-16, 18, 33-4 

scribes 7, 15-16, 31-7, 42, 73, 89, 135, 
137, 159 

sculpture 62, 65, 66, 68, 132-3, 142, 
143-8 

Sea Peoples 115, 117-19 

Second Intermediate Period xiv, 92, 97, 
103, 107 

Sekhemkhet (king) 71 

Sekhmet (goddess) 49, 50 

Selket (gpddess) 49, 50 

Semitic language 35 

Senenmut (TT353; official) 102-3, 165 

settlement sites 127-33, 135-8, 154 

Sety I (king) 66, 162, 165 

Shabaqo Stone 16 

Shalmaneser IV (king) 36 

Sheikh Said 65 

shield 106, 108, 116-17, 119-20 

ships 118-19 

shipwrecks 87 

siege equipment and warfare 95, 96, 106, 
111, 118 

silica 85 

siltstone 59 

silver 8, 124, 158 

silver birch (Betula pendula) 99, 105 

Sinai 102 


197 


Ptolemy III (king) 45 
pyramids 7, 19-21, 66, 68-75 
Pythagoras 12, 22 


Qadesh 108, 114-15, 122 

Qantir (Piramesse) 56, 86-7, 91, 93, 101, 
116, 117, 119-21, 9 

Qar (official) 47 

Qena 55 

quarries 7, 49, 56, 63-8, 69 

quartz 57, 153 

Quibell, James Edward 47 

quiver 105, 108 


Ramesses II (king) 63, 117, 136 


Ramesses III (king) 94, 115, 117-19, 136 


Ramesses IV (king) 162 

Ramesses V (king) 135 

Ramesses VI (king) 165 

Ramesses VII (king) 165 

Ramesses IX (king) 136, 165 

Ramesseum 51, 63 

Ramesseum IV-V (papyrus) 40 

Ramesseum Onomasticon 14 

Ranefer 80, 81, 83 

rawhide 99, 108, 121 

reed 65, 69 

Rekhmira (TT100; official) 64, 88, 148, 
149-50 

religion 39, 89, 547 

religious texts 25, 45, 46 

resin 80, 81, 82 

Rhind Mathematical Papyrus 17-18, 19, 
20,21 

ritual 25, 35, 37, 42, 44, 46, 59, 61, 70, 
79, 81-4, 89, 114, 154 

‘Ritual of embalming’ (P. Boulaq III and 
P. Louvre 5.158) 79 

Roman Period vii, xiv, 8, 54 

Rome 14, 40, 44 

rope 4 

royal courts 32-7, 52, 113, 154 


Index 


terminology (ancient/foreign) 37, 88, 92, 
103 

textiles 5, 99-101, 105, 129, 140, 149 

Thebes 9, 51, 63, 64, 65, 86, 88, 91, 95, 
96, 103, 126, 135-6, 148, 150, 158, 
161, 165 

Third Intermediate Period 80, 157 

Thoth (god) 12 

‘Three Age System’ 123 

Thuban 71 

Thuthotep (official) 66 

Thutmose I (king) 86 

Thutmose III (king) 8, 9, 86, 88, 90, 91, 
103, 105 

Thutmose IV (king) 98 

Thutnefer 9 

Timaeus 16 

tin 124 

Tiye (queen) 132 

‘Tomb Robbery Papyri 135 

tombs 68-9, 83-4, 134, 163 

transportation (of objects) 66, 68, 69, 71, 
73-4, 18 

travertine 49, 59, 63, 65, 66, 82 

Tumbos 66 

Tuna el-Gebel 10 

Tushratta (king) 93, 120 

Tutankhamun (king) 88, 93, 99, 100, 
125 

Ty (official) 8, 56, 100 


U-j (tomb) 28-9, 29 
UC 32036 40 

Ugarit 119 

Ulu Burun shipwreck 87 
Umm el-Sawwan 64 
Unas (king) 163 

Upper Egypt 5, 55, 61 
uraeus 46 

Jrartu 104 

Jrhi Teshup (king) 117 


urukmannu 120 


U 
U 


Sinki 72-3 

Sirius 160, 164 

smelting 5, 124-5 

snake bites 42, 50-1 

Sneferu 22, 46, 83 

Sobek 53, 54 

Sobeknakht (official) 95 

soda-lime 85 

Soleb 103 

Sopdet (goddess) 160, 164 

spear 108, 115, 118 

spells 35, 42, 44, 45, 47 

statuary 65-6, 147 

statuettes 46-7, 51 

stelae 48, 49, 50, 84, 17 

Step Pyramid 47 

stone masonry 7, 41, 56, 62, 68-71, 
157 

stone tools 4, 55-61, 64, 158 

stone vessels 4, 60-5, 67-8, 91, 112, 153, 
161 

stone-working 55-76, 99, 132-3, 146, 
148, 153 

stone workshops 63, 66-8 

Sudan 102 

Sumer 24, 27 

surveying 69, 158 

Syria 35-6, 88, 90, 98, 103, 107, 108, 
116, 118, 121, 123 


tablets, clay 32-5 

talatat block 116 

Tale of Neferkaptah 12 

Tale of Setna Khaemwaset 12 

Tarkhan 80 

Taweret 147 

technology (processes of change) 1-3, 10, 
51-4, 75-6, 80, 82, 90-1, 92, 97, 
111, 122-6 

Tel el-Malyan 140 

Tell Brak 90 

Tell el-Dab’a 102, 107 

Tell el-Farkha 6, 59 


198 


Index 


Weni (official) 107 

Westcar Papyrus (P. Berlin 3033) 46 

wheels 95, 99, 100 

Wilbour Papyrus 135-6 

willow (Salix subserrata) 99 

wine production 4, 7 

‘wisdom? 52 

wood-working 7, 8, 10, 56, 68-9, 98- 
100, 108, 117, 126, 129, 131, 134, 
140, 146, 149 

Woolley, Leonard 134, 141 

workshops 7, 61, 63, 65-8, 92, 98, 113, 
117, 127, 132-4, 148, 3 

writing (early forms) 6, 24, 26-30 

writing systems 24-31 


V2 rocket 109 

Valley of the Kings 105, 165 

valley temples 67, 73 

Varna 94 

veterinary medicine 40 

vivisection 45 

vocabulary (ancient terminology) 13 
votive offerings 59 


Wadi Qubbanet el-Qirud 86 

wands 51 

warfare 95, 104, 106-7, 110-14 

Waty/Nefer? (official) 80 

weaponry 4, 92, 95, 106, 110-13, 115-19, 
121-3, 5 

weaving 129, 140, 145, 149 


Ancient Egyptian terms 


ntrwy-blade 83 

rw (religious texts) 44 

rb (knowing: ‘science’”) 11 

hin (measure of capacity — 0.47 litres) 
159 

p3k (captives and plunder) 107 

pmuwt, bhmuwty (craft, craftsman) 14, 63 

pmuwt-smit (desert workshop) 67 

pmktw (‘strangulation’ disease) 35 

pk3t (measure of capacity — 4.77 litres) 
159 

pk3 (magic) 45-6 

ptr (span of horses) 103 

brp srkt (controller of Selket) 49-51 

þsbd (lapis lazuli) 88 

bt (body) 50 

þ3r (measure of capacity — c. 0.15 litres) 
159 

s3w (protectors or amulet-men) 49 

s nbyw (sculptors) 142 

swnw (physician) 42, 47, 49, 50 

snnyw (elite military corps) 93 

sw (rituals or treatments) 44 

skr nbþ (captive) 107 


3bd (month) 160 

3þt (inundation season)160, 161 
inr n wdþ (glass) 88 

St wdbt (glass) 88 

¢ (moment) 160 

w3s-sceptre 162 

w'b-priest 49-50 

wr ibhy (chief dentist) 47 

wr swnw (chief physician) 47 
wrrt (chariot) 92 

whd (corruption?) 43 

by (sighting tool) 69, 164 
bi3tyw (metal-workers) 142 
bri-wood 93 

pr nb (house of life) 40 

prt (spring) 160 

pbrt (prescriptions) 44 

ps kf (knife) 59, 83-4 

pd šs (stretching the cord’ ritual) 70, 163 
mitt pw (mathematical term)18 
mrþt (instrument of knowing”) 69, 164 
mrkbt (chariot) 92 

mtw (vessels?) 43, 50 
nmst-vessel 84 


199 


Index 


skd (pyramid slope) 19-21 kdt (kite; measure of weight — 91g) 158 
stfiw (butchers) 142 gnuwtyw (sculptors) 142 

st3t (aroura; 100 cubits square) 157 t3 (100 royal cubits) 157 

š¥mw (summer) 160 dbn (measure of weight — 93.3g) 158 


Assyrian terms 


bartibe 36 zukh-glass 89 


200 


