EARLY 
DYNASTIC 


EGYPT 


TOBY A. H. WILKINSON 


Also available as a printed book 
see title verso for ISBN details 


EARLY DYNASTIC EGYPT 


EARLY DYNASTIC 
EGYPT 


Toby A.H.Wilkinson 


London and New York 


Roualege i am tnprint ofthe Tartar & Freneis Grea 
rai cdo publtned u che Taylor & Frames e Library, 2005 


€ 1o0 Toby AILWilkimon 


“Alright rexervel, No port of lis book may be repene or 
onopedaced r ultsed on any rm or by any lebron, 
Lmechumieal. of other mean, now know a hereafer 
dvemel neluding photocopying and reese, or in any 


Library of Cararest Cataloguing iı Pihlication Data 
Wilkinnan, Toby AIT 
Early Dyraic Fy Toby AIL Wikinsan 
cludes biniographic refrenees (378) and iden. 
1. Fey ary To 32C. Tie 


IR633-1 (Print Edition) 


For Benjamin 


2 
s0 


2 
27 
15 
o8 
کد‎ 


0د 
297 
316 
317 
7د 
36 


CONTENTS 
List of plates 
Litofhgures 
Prologue 


Aclnowledgenents 


PARTI 
INTRODUCTION 


1 Ezyplology and the Early Dynastic Period 
2 Birhofa Nation Stale 
3 Historical Oulline 


PARTI 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY 


4 Administration 
5 Foreign Relations 

6 Kingship 

7 Royal Moray Architecture 
8 


Cults and Shrines 


PARTI 
THE DIVERSITY OF LOCAL EXPERIENCE 


9 TeRiseofUrbanisn 
10 TheRegioasofEzypt 
Epilogue 
Glossary 
Biblograpy 
der 


PLATES 


The Umm elQnab at Abydos 
Mastaba KI ax Belt Khallaf 

The Early Dynastic cemetery at Tarklaan 

An élite First Dynasty tomb at North Saqqara 

The Early Dynastic necropolis st Helvan/cl-Maasar 
Tell e-Fara' 

Abu Ravash 
King Ninetjer 

The emblem of the Sed-festival 

Palace facade architecture, 2 

The tomb of Qua 

The unfinished step pyramid complex of Sekhemkhet at Saqqara 
Markers ofthe royal cult 


11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

a1 
a2 

6 
62 
2 
2 
1 


FIGURES 


Map 1 Map ofEgyptand Nubia showing sites mentioned in the text a 
Map 2 Map ofthe Near East showing sites mentioned in the text x 
Chronological chart of the lale Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods 22 

21 Early centves of kingship a1 
22 Tede, ownership and power 3 
23 Kings before the Fist Dynasty 4 
3.1 Rulers ofthe Fit Dynasty: contempocary lists 5 
32 Royal annals ک5‎ 
33 Yearlalel of Semetthet ه‎ 
34 Ephemeral rulers, 1: Weneg and Nubnefer 2 
35 The Third Dynasty: a problem solved 5 
36 Ephemeral rulers, 2 Khaba s5 
41. Royal domains 
42 Enes 102 
43 The weasury and its functions 10 
44 Taration 4 
45 The ites ofthe vizier 17 
46 The structure of Early Dynastic administration 3 
5.1 Campaigns against souhem Palestine 5 
52 Activity in Egypt's desert margins 142 
53 Campaigns against Nubia 151 
61 The staffofofce 159 
62 TMerederown i 
63 The white crown 166 
64 Standards o early royal monuments 160 
65 The Two Ladies 4 
66 Hunting the hippopotamus 5 
67 Year labels i8 
68 Palace-façade architecture, I 194 
7.1. The royal cemetery at Abydos 20 


72 The royal cemetery at Saqqara 208 


20 


250 
261 


Depiction of deities 
Human sacrifice 

Divine images 

Royal cult statues 

Early Dynastic cult dedications 
The godless Mallet 


Festivals iavolvîng a divîne bark 


Early Dynastic shrines and temples 
Early cul at Buto, 1: the sacred bull 

Early eu at But, 2 the Djchaur shrine 

Eikab 

Map ofthe Hierakonpolis region showing sites mentioned in the text 
Map ofthe Abydos region showing sites mentioned in the text 

Map ofthe Memplhite region showing sites mentioned in the text 


e 
2 
3 
s4 
5 
s6 
s7 
s4 
s9 

s0 
o1 

ı01 
ı02 

103 


PROLOGUE 


Ancient Egypt holds a unique fascination. No other civilisation of the ancient word has 
auch popular appeal, none is as significant for the history of human society and its 
organistion, The valley of the River Nile winessed the world's fist example of that 
enduring aad now omnipresent political structure, the nation state. Today, practically the 
weslire land surface of the earth ts divided among hution sales, which number nearly two 
hundred. But the origins of this phenomenon go back five housind years, to he 
formation of a unified territory and goverment in Egypt. Moreover, hat goverment, 
centred oa the royal court and the person of the king, succeeded in creating and 
promoting an dlite culture which expressed itself on a grund seale. Hence, ancient 
Egyptian civilisation hus lef an unparalleled series of monuments to allure and intrigue 
eountlese generations of visitors 

‘The pyrmids of fhe Old Kingdom are perhaps the most remarkcable, and certainly the 
most captivating, of Egyptian monuments. Those at Giza were hailed as one of he 
wonders of he ancient world; to modem eyes they are perhaps the quintessential synibol 
Ofihe ancient Egyptians extraordinary creativity and craftsmanship. Yet the cultural and 
political developments which led 10 the construction of the pyramids have been 
Somparatively neglected. Without ceniral control of the seonomy, he royal court would 
not have had the resourezs 1o engage in monumental building projects. Without he 
ability 1o command the necessary manpower, he pyramids could not have been raised. 
Without the religious and ideological motivation, the coastructioa of huge funerary 
monuments would, quite erally, never have got of the ground. All these peeroquisites 
for pyramid-building have their roots in the Early Dynastic period, Hence 1o understand 
he most potent symbols of ancient Egypl, we must lok at whut went before. Five 
hundred years separate the birth of the Egyptian state und the erection of the pyramids 
This half millennium constinutes the formative period of civilicatioa in the Nile valley, 
when Eyp's early Kings developed the mechanisms of mule and he dle culture thal 
were to characterise theif county for fhe next three thousand years. This crucially 
important formative stage is the subject of the current work. 

The chaptees that follow seek to explain not only the background to the formation of 
he Egyptian stale, bu also the means by which is carly rulers coatrolled the people, the 
land and its resources. Central authority, however, is only one side of the coin. Ai 
periods, Egypt's goveming dte strove to convey the impeession that the natioa was 
nilîed politeally and culturally, hat all its institutions revolved around the king and 
ook their lead from the royal court, The true picture is rather more complex: in real 
local and regional coacems were important, and often had a direet pact on the pace and 
direction of change. Egypt was never a monolihic state, despite the wishes and 
protestations of its rulers The cuqent work addresses this ieteresting question, examining 
he chareter of Early Dynastic Egypt at the provincial level 

‘The evidence for local and regional variation is by no means straightforward; but her 
ıa elsewhere ia the study of carly Egypt, recent scholarship has led to major ativanees ih 


understanding, Indeed, research nto the formative peril of ancient Egyptian civilisation 
has intensified exponentially over the past thirty years. The re-evaluation of material 
fom old excavations has been accompanied by dramaûe new discoveries, Recond 
numbers of archaeological expedisons have been concentrating their efforts oa 
iluminating the remotest periods of Egyptian history, and in particular the processes 
which led 1o the formation of the Egyptlun slate. As 3 result of this new information, & 
comprehensive study of the Early Dynastic period can now be attempted for the first 

Early Dynastic Egypt has traditionally suffered from being squeezed between Iwo, 
more obviously glamorous, neighbours. On the one hand, 1he prehistoric origins of 
ancient Egypt and the uifkation of the country at the beginning of the historic peciod 
have inerlguel scholars, ateacting much comment and debate. On the other hand, the 
wglocies ofthe pyramid age, combined with a wealth of artistic and written evidence, have 
given the Old Kingdom an undeniable appeal for professionals and public alike. While 
he Predymastic period and the Old Kingdom have been intensively studied, the 
intervening phase of Egyptian history the Early Dynastic period has been 
comparatively neglected The current work seeks to redress the ieibalance, giving the first 
three dynasties he tention hey deserve as a period of gest ianovatioa anl lasting 
importance, a period, moreover, which paved the way for the familiar glories of ancient 
Et 

This book is arranged in three parts. Part 1 foes an introductioa to the study of Early 
Dynastic Egypt The rediscovery of Egypt's remote past, alhough very much 4 feature 
of he last three decades, began moce than a century ago. A long line Of distinguished 
archaeologist and scholars hve adiled pieces 1o he puzzle, although the picture 1s by no 
means complete. Chapter 1 tells the extrosdinary stocy of how ‘Egypt before the 
pyramids’, once an obscure dark age, has emerged fiom the shadows into the spotlight of 
‘academic inquiry and popular interest. 

The formation of & unified stute marks the beginning of Egyptian history and this 
pivotal development is examined in detail in Chapter 2. The roots of the process lie Tar 
ick in prehistocy. in the period called ‘Predynasie’ (that is, before the dynasties) 
Southern (Upper) Eaypt was the heartland of social change, since it was here that 
hierarchies and social divisions based upon inherited status firt developed During the 
second half of the fourth millennium BC, political and economic power came to be 
Concentrated in the hands of a fev ruling lites. Advances in technology and an 
intensifcation of trade benefited some centres more than others, and at these favoured 
ıl fhe local rulers began 1o adopt the trappings of royalty. As these trends accelerated, 
Egypt was ransformed and s nation was born. 

The five centuries which followed comprise a fıscinating period of Egypt's history, 
but one which is all too ofien glossed over in standard books on the subject. Chapter 3 
presents fhe first ever, detailed, seign-byareign account of the period, drawing on he 
fesults of the latest research by an ttemational community of expert. The discussion 
inehades an evaluation of he historical sources for the frst ree dynasties, and examines 
he splendid achievements of Egypt's early kings 

"Wûth Part I, he scene is thus set for an in-depth analysis of Early Dynastic Ey. 

The dominant themes of early Egyptian civilisation are examined in Pant Il, which 
forms the core ofthe book. Subtitled The establishment of authority, Part I analyses the 


various mechanisms by which Egypt's early rulers fit developed and then exercised 
authority over a newly untied country, The word “establishment” has been deliberately 
Chosen for its dul meaning: the seting up of an Heology of mule, and the institutional 
sauetures hy whieh this ideology was put into effect The most obvious facet of he 
‘establishment is the administration, the govemmental apparstus which allowed the 
royal court 1o supervise and control Egypt and is resources. Very litle has been writen 
about early Egyptian administration, mainly because the source material is fragmentary 
and dificult 1o ieterpeet. However, a close look st he surviving evidence or 
administrative peactiees indicates shat in ancient Egypt as in countries ioday__coninol 
ofthe economy lay at the hear of the government's activities. The court iself comprised 
ıa bewildering array of officials, and there are tantalising glimpses of how poliical power 
was exercised a this earliest period of Egyptian history. OF course, coatrol of the national 
economy was dependent upoa control of the various provinces; provincial government 
seems to have developed intially ss sn adjunct o economic supervision, luler taking on a 
Jite of its own (as the history of the Old Kingdom demonstrates), Chapter 4 examines all 
these aspects of Early Dyaastie administration, and seeks to dew a coherent picture of 
how carly Ezypt was govemed 

Egypt was no alone in the ancient world, To the north and south were other lands and 
ıculaures, and contact with them was unavoidable, If the coatinued supply of commodities 
to the epurt lay at the heart of Egyptian administration, it also formmed the backdrop to 
early Egypt's foreign relations, La ts quest for raw materials und prestige goods, he royal 
court had to lok beyond the Nile valley to the adjoining desert regions and oher lands 
further afield. The desire to gain access to trade routes with Palestine and Nubia may 
have been a key factor in the process of state focmation. Once Egypt had been unilied, 
mere access to foreign imports was no longer sufficient direct control of foreign trade o 
Of the commodity sources themselves became both desirable and feasible. Economie 
interest provided grounds for polieal expansionian. There is evidence that Early 
Dynastic kings lauached military campaigns against neighbouring lands, and the moive 
dis likely to have been largely economic, even if such actives were dressed in a cloak of 
ideology. EypI's foreign relations during the Early Dynastic period highlight both the 
concems of the early state and the ways in which these affected, and were affected by, the 
geopolitics of the wider region. The coanplex interaction beeween fhe Nile valley, 
Egypt's desert margins, and neighbouring lands is discussed in Chapter 5. 

hn order o control Egypt and is people, the early Kings followed a nuner of different 
suategies. Together wilh he overt political and economic contol attested in 
Sdmiaistrative records, more subtle psychological means were deployed 1o ensure the 
loyalty and subservience of the population. Perhaps the most powerful and pervasive 
ideology in ancient Egyptian culture was the ideology of divine kingship: the belief that 
he king was the earthly incarnation of the supreme deity, a channel of communication 
between the divine and human spheres, and the unifying force taut held Egypt together, 
wihout whom chaos would ensue. Such an ideology obviously suited the system of 
goverment since ic ensured strong suppor foe the status quo and made any return 1o the 
political frgmentation of the Prelynastie period unthinkable, Divine kingship is often 
Cited as the defining characteristic of ancient Egyptian civilisation. Yet its success and 
longevity as an ideology of rule owes much to the efforts of the Early Dynastic Kings, 
whe formulated and promoted ic The origins and carly development of this most 


fundamental aspect of Egyptian culture are explored in Chapter 6. The nature of eacly 
kiagship how ihe rulers saw themselves and their office can be gauged from a variety 
of sources, in particular the names and tiles adopted by successive monarchs, nd he 
activities deemed worthy of record in the royal annals. The means by which kingship 
ideology was promulgated are equally fascinating They inchaded a repertoire of symbols 
Gieonography) which became indelibly associaied with royal authority, and whose 
preponderance in official at constantly reinforced the message that Egypt depended oa 
he king for is well-being. Ceremonies and rivals peovided the early Egyptian kings with 
carefully conteolled, symbolically charged occasions on which they could demonstrate 
thelr legitimaey and authority. Finally, the poteney of architecture to express ideas of 
status was apprecialed fromm an early stage. Through the development of an explicitly 
foyal architectural style the Early Dynastic Kings sought 10 secure their position by 
appealing 1o the Egyplian psyche. 

The concer to provide for ile after death is one of the best known aspects of ancient 
Egyplian civilisation. To it is due such characteristic features as mummies and pyramids 
Te most impressive ronumments 10 have survived fro Early Dynastic Egypt are the 
funerary strvctures built for he kings and their relives, The development of the royal 
toah, leading eventually to the concept of the pyramid, is explored in Chapter 7. The 
chumges ia the form of the royal burial over the course of the Early Dynastic period 
reflect not oaly advances in architecture and building technology, but also changes in the 
concept of the afterlife. Moreover, as the most important project of a king's reign, the 
royal tomb can tell us much about the selEiamuge and public portrayal of kingship. 

"Religion plays an important role in most societies and early Egypt was no exception. 
Te bewildering array of cults so charnclerisic 0¢ pharsonie Egypt was a feature of 
ıeligious life in he Nile valley rons the beginning of Egyptian history. Numerous gods 
and godilesses are atested Romm Early Dynastic Egypt, together with religious festivals 
and other eultie setiviies. Chapter & presents the evidence for early Egyptian religion, 
and examines he way in which seligion was manipulated by the royal court for Its our 
ends, The concems of the individual and those of the state rarely coincide where 
imteraction wilh the divine sphere is involved. Nothing illustrates the divide between he 
early Egyptian state and its subjects beer than temple building: whilst cane was lavished 
om a few, nationally significant, temples, local shrines received litle or no state atetion. 
“An analysis of religion in the Hirst rev dynasties highlights the tension between rulers 
and ruled: a tension that EgypI's first kKlags sought to contain, and which forms a central 
heme ofthe current work. 

Tombs and temples are certainly inıpeessive and informative, but hey tell oly part of 
he tory. To get to the heart of Early Dynastic Egypt, 1o understand life in he Nile valley 
and how ie developed, we must eseape the alluring worldview promoted by the court and 
ook instead at individual communities and regions. This is the focus of Part Ill, which 
seeks 1o provide a evumerbalance to the counksentred culture s0 dominant in hooks about 
ancient Egypt. The growth of urban communities marks an important stage in the history 
Of human society. The process of wbanisation it Egypt is parieularly instructive as 
seems to feflect local and regional factors more than centrally inspired policies, la recent 
Years the number of setlemeats exeavated in Egypt has inereased markedly. Chapter 9 
discusses the evidence for early urbanism, pointing out the factors which influenced the 
development of cach community. 


This leads on 1o the final chapter of the book, which stands back and takes a regional 
view of developments in Early Dynastic Egypt. Mueh of the history of Egypt is the 
hinory of its egions. Particular combinations of natural and suutegie advantages 
favoured some parts of the county over others the eterplay between segions aflecled the 
development of Egyptian society as a whole. Chapter 10 seeks to explain why some areas 
prospered during the fist three clynasties while others declined; for ia the answers to such 
questioas lies the history of Egypt's formative period. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Plte 32 is reproduced with the kind permission of the Commitee of the Egypt 
Exploration Society. 

This book could not have been written without the assistance, support and 
encouragement of many individuals 

First and foremost, my thanks are due to Christ's College, Cambcidge, which, in 
awanding mme the Lady Wallis Budge Junior Research Fellowship in Egyptology, 
provided generous financial support for the four years of research and writing which wenî 
into this book 1 should like 1o express my gruitade to the Managers of the Lady Wallis 
Budge Fund; to ihe Research Fund Managers and the College Council of Christ's College 
for further financial support; and not least to the late Sir Eme Alfred Thompson Wallis 
Budge hinselt, one ime scholar of Christ's College, for the generosity and focesight 
which have so benefited British Egyptology in the six decades since his death, Christ's 
has also provided the perfect environment tn which to live and work, for which everyone 
in the College the Master, foemer Master, fellows, safî snd students deserves my 
Meare thanks 

My researeh into the early periods of ancient Egyptian civilisation has benefited 
greatly from diseussions with a number of colleagues. For their unfailing interest in my 
work, their help and encouragement, 1 should like to thank Cambridge Egyptologists 
Bary Kemp, John Ray, Janine Bourriau, Df Eleni Vassilika, Df Kate Spence and Will 
‘Schenck. Kale Spence also drew the excelent illustrations which accompany the text 
Other scholars have given generously of their time to provide advice and information: 
Barbara Adams, Nicole Alexanian, Professor ohn Baines, Dr Stan Hendricks, David 
Jefîreys, Dr Cristiana Köhler, lan Mathieson, Dr Stephan Seidimayer and Ana Tavares 
Many distinguished experts were Kind enough to read and corament on the ist draf of 
his book: Dr Edvîn van den Bink, Dr Stan Hendriekx, Bany Kemp, Dr Geraldine 
Pinch, Dr Stephen Quirke, Dr Kate Spence and Dr Jefey Spencer. 1 should like to 
express my profound thanks 1 all of thems for their insightful comments and suggestions 
whieh have contributed immeasurably 1o he final form of the work. Any eons or 
Omissions remain, of course, the author's sole responsibil. 

Finally, 1 owe a great debt of gratitade to all my family and fiends, without whose 
love, fiienilahip and encouragement this book could not have been rine. 1 should like 
to single out the chapel choir of Christ's College, Cambridge which has, over the year, 
provided the perfect antidote to academic research. For their unwavering suppor. I offer 
"ly special thanks to Cathy, Duncan and Sarah, Hilary, John, Nicki, Parshia and Sin. My 
genes source of inspiration has undoubtedly been my nephew, Benjamin, and itis with 
love and pride hat 1 dediente this book 1o him. 


NOTE 


Those words in bold throughout the text can be found in the glossary at the end of he 
book 


Map 1 Map of Egypt and Nubia showing sites 
mentioned in the text. Small capitals 
denote ancient place names. Key: 1 En 
Besor (inchuded here to help relate Map 1 


in/BUTO: 3 
BEHDET; 4 Kom elLHisn; 5 SAIS; 6 Tell 
er-Ruba/Tell TimaVMENDES; 7 Ezbet et- 


Awad; 10 Tell ed-Daba; 11 Minshat Abu 
Omar: 12 SETHROÊ?, 13 el Beda; 14 
Beni Amir; 15 Tell Basta BUBASTIS; 16 
LETOROI 

19 Maadi and Wadi Digi 
Saqqara; 22 MEMPHIS; 23 Dahshur: 24 
Tarkhan; 25 es-Saff; 26 Medinet el- 
Fayum; 27 Seila; 28 Maidum; 29 Abusir 
ıel-Meleq; 30 Haraga: 31 
HERAKLEOPOLIS; 32 Zawiyet el- 
Meitin; 33 Matmar, 34 Badari; 35 
Hemamla; 36 Qau; 37 cl-Etmani 
Aklhmim; 39 THIS?; 40 ABYDOS; 41 
‘Abu Umuri; 42 Hu; 43 Abadiya; 44 
Dendera; 45 Qena; 46 QIUCOPTOS; 47 
Quseir 48 Tukh; 49 Naqada and Ballas; 
S0 Deir el-Bahri; 51 Medamud; 52 
Amant; 53 Gebclein; 54 Adalma; 55 el- 
Kula; 56 Elkab; 57 HIERAKONPOLIS; 
S8 Ef; 59 Gebel es-Silsila; 60 Kubara; 
61 ELEPHANTINE; 62 Aswan; 63 


67 BUHEN; 68 Gebel Sheikh Suleiman; 
69 Balat; 70 BERENICE. For sites in the 
Hierakonpolis, Abydos and Memphite 
regions, please refer to Figures 10.1, 102 
and 103 


Map 2 Map of the Near East showing sites 
mentioned in the text. Small capitals 
denote ancient place names. Key: 1 
KNOSSOS; 2 Habuba Kebirı; 3 Sheikh 
Hassan; 4 Tell Brak: 5 Uruk; 6 SUSA: 7 
UGARIT; $ BYBLOS; 9 Mi Hermon; 10 


Azor, 11 Tel Erani; 12 Nizanim; 13 Tel 
Maahaz; 14 LACHISH; 15 Ai; 16 Nahal 
Tillah; 17 Rafah; 18 Taur Ikhbeineh; 19 


En Besor; 20 Tell Arad; 21 Tell el- 
Fara'in/BUTO; 22 Saqqara; 23 
HIERAKONPOLIS; 24 ELEPHANTINE 
(sites 21-24 are included here to help 
relate Map 2 to Map 1). 


PARTI 
INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER ONE 
EGYPTOLOGY AND THE EARLY 
DYNASTIC PERIOD 


THE PIONEERS: 1494-1935 


Ades: Amêlineau and Petrie 


The history of Egypt began st Abydos. Here in Upper Egypt, on the low desert beneath 
he towering western escarpment (Plate 1.1), the Predynastie rulers of the region, and 
heir descendants, the carliest kings of a united Egypt, were buried with their retainers 
and possessions. Amongst the 1ombs of he ancestral royal cemetery, a burial of 
unparalleled size ras prepared around 3150 BC for s leader who may already have ruled 
over most, if not all, of Egypt About a century later, anothet king was buried neacby: 
Karmer, «ho was apparenlly regarded by his immediate successors as the founder of the 
First Dynasty, and whose ceremonial palette recalls the unlfieatlen of the Tuo Lands, in 
silval if not ia fact. The mortuary complex of Narmer's successor, Aha, was also 
constructed at Abydos. Aha's reign may mark the systematic keeplag of annals, and it 
may thus be regarded as The beginning of Egyptian history ia a strict sense of he word. 
Ezyptian history also began at Abydos in another sense: t was here, n the dying years 
ofthe aineteenth century und in the early years of the twentieth, taut archaeologists first 
uncovered evidence of Egypt's remote past The excavation and re-exeavation Of he 
soyal cemetery ut Abydos which still catinues after more than a century—bas 
Wansformed our understanding of the earliest period of Egyptian history. Today, as 4 
hundred years ago, each new discovery fromm the sands of Abydos enhances or modifies 
our picture of the Nile valley during the formative phase of ancient Egyplian civilisation. 
As we shall see, many other sites have contributed to the total picture, but none more s0 
than Abydos. Abydos, above any other site, holds the key to EgŞP's early dynasûes. 
Before the fist excavations in the royal cemetery at Abydos, there was not a single 
object in the Egypêan Museum that could be duel securely to the First or Second 
Dynasty (de Morgan 1896:181), Indend, before exeavatoes began unearthing the burials 
of he Early Dynastic kings, ‘the history of Egypt oaly began with the Great Pram 
(Perrie 1939:160). The pyramids of the late Thindlearly Fourth Dynasty at Maidum and 
Dahshur were the oldest monuments known to scholars. The Step Pyramid complex at 
"Saqqara had not yet been excavated fron the drift sand As for the King of the first three 
dynasties recorded in the kag lists of the New Kingdom and in Manetho 's history, they 
were no more than names, legendary figures for whom no historical evidence existed. 


Bayptology and e erly yaxe period 3 


“The Umm el-Qaab at Abydos, burial 
‘ground of Eqypt's early mics (author's 

photograph). 

“Emile Clêment Ardlintau (18S0 1915) was the ist to clear the royal tombs of he 
"Fir aad lale Sead Dyan in a syvtaiuêe way, silbcug Auguste Marlene (Û2 
B1) bad worked uf he she some ory years before. Amlineau's excavations at Abydos 
Som T84 1o TES yielded impocan revulis, but his unscientific methods drew citielem, 
pecially Roun his grea civa anî aueeaant ot Aly dat, Paria, ie probably biî 1o saj 
Sha he Aula Andllneu was drives moe by the ania of private eollecton than DY 
adele o siete cooceens fir he culture of carly Egypt. Howevet, he mane u 
oulledly se af any her exevadon ia the Nile Yulay af lial rne and he, 
neiine's cunibuica i ringing he iuporance a Atyûns 10 he atentioa of 
Baypolagists should not be dismissed, dapite his obvious hilings by modern 
sawlards. The objects he und in the royal tabs were published in four volumes 
Cmelineau TAO, 1O2. 1904. 1905) aad ete sold at auction Hd Faris lw 1904 Some 
iered nue, clhe ended up i priv ctlicelioes. Seholariy eres li EJPs 


Bly aa Bort 4 


scariest hiıorical period had now been well and truly awakened, and archaeologists were 
Swi to follow in Amdlineau's footmeps 

Wiliam Musthew Flinders Pewie (1853-1942), the founding her of Egyptian 
archaeology, kall been intereted in Egypt's fomative period foc some years. His 
pioneering mission 10 Coptos in 1893-4 revealed material of the late Predynastie and 
Early Dynastic periods fof the first time most famously the colossal statues Of a fertility 
god and effeetively pushed buck Egyptian history by some 400 years, Rom he 
Peginning of the Old Kingdom to the beginning of the First Dynasty (Poikie 1896) 
Peleie's subsequent excavations at Naqada and Balls in 1895 yielded extensive 
Predynusic material (Petrie and Quibell 1896) and led him to focmulale his famous 
sequence dating system, he principle of which has been used by scholars ever since 1o 
dale Predynastic coatexts. 

Peleie's discovery" of the Predynastie period was followed by new insights into dhe 
earliest dynasties, gained through his exeavations at Abydos in 1899 1903. He nushed 1o 
ihe Early Dynastic royal cemetery following the departure of Amêlineau and was able ‘1o 
rescue foc historical study” (Pele 1900-2) what had been lef behind. Petrie no doubt 
exaggerated Amlinesv's filings and his our achievements, but here is no denying that 
Pelfie's discoveries were of great significance, and dramatically enhanced understanding 
of Egypt's carly history, not least by establishing the order of the Fist Dynasty Kings 
(Petrie 1900, 1901). ln the later seasons, Petrie tummed his attention to the early town and 
temple of Abydos (Perie 1902, 1903). His excavations uncovered a small cemetery of 
the early Fist Dynasty, a jumble of walls belonging to the Early Dynastic temple, and 
heee deposits of votive objects. 

A the same time as Petrie was reexcavating the royal toaıbs at Abydos, his colleague 
John Garstang (1876-1956) was iwestigating Predynastic and Early Dyaastic sites 4 
ile to he north, in the vicinity of the villages of Mahasna, Reqaqna and Beit Khallaf 
Near ihe first Iw be revealed a cemetery of Third Dynasty tambs (Garstang 1904), while 
on the low desert behind Beit Khalaf he excavated several huge mastabas of mmuibrick 
(Plate 12), also dated to the Third Dynasty (Garstang 1902). From the point of view of 
Early Dynastic history, he most impodant finds fiom Beit Khallaf were the seal 
impressions. One of these, fiom mastaba K2, shows the name of King Sanakht opposite 
he lower ead ofa cartouche. This is the earliest atiested oecurrence of the famme used 1o 
enclose the royal name, anû the sealing provides the sole evidence or equating the 
Horus name, Sanakil, with The cartouche nme, Nebka. 


Bayplology and e erly dynastic period 5 


Plate 1.2 Mastaba KI at Belt Khallaf, dating to the 
reign of Netjerikhet, Third Dynasty 
(author's photograph). 


Discoveries further south: e Morgan, Qulbell and Green 


Whilst Amdlineau and Petrie were arguing over the spoils of Abydos, discoveries in 
southern Upper Egypt were shedding imponant new light on Early Dynastie Egypt, its 
filers and their nehievemenits. Together wilh Abydos, Iwo sles are of key signileanee 
for the process of stale formation and for the early development of Egyptian civilisation, 
Naqada and Hierakenpolis, and it was a these he sites that excavations at the turn of he 
century yielded spectacular results One of the outstanding achievements of Jacques Jean 
Marie de Mocgan (1857-1924) was the discovery and exeavatioa of he royal 1o at 
Naqada (de Morgan 1897). Identified at fist ss the tomb of the legendary Menes 
(Borchardt 1898), but subsequently as the burial of Queen Neithrhotep (probably the 
mother of Aha), this was the first substantial structure of the First Dynasty 1o be 
Exeavatel in Egypt, and i demonstrated the scale of monumental architecture a1 the Ver 
beginning of Egypûan history. De Morgan also established the link between he 
Predynastie period und he carly dynasties, hus implicitly recognising the Early Dynastic 
period as the culmination of a long sequence of cultural development 

‘ln the same year as de Morgans great discovery at Naqada, excavations began oa the 
town mound at Hierakoapolis the Kon el-Ahmar. They were directed by James Edvard 
Quibell (1867-1935, wilo had excavated with Perie st Coptos in the pioneering sesso 
of 1893-4, Assisted by Frederick Green and Somers Clarke, he work at Hicrakonpolis 
fiom 1897 to 1898, before handing over to Green for the following sesa (Quibell 1900: 
Quibell and Green 1902). 1n the temple are of the town mound the archaeologists found 
a circular revement belonging 1o the Early Dynastic temple and a cude limestone 
weylindrieal stare similar to the coleossi from Coptos. The temple also yielded spectacular 


Baty at Bot 6 


objects of Old Kingdom date, including life-size copper statues of two Sixth Dynasty 
Kings and a golden hawk head. Most significant for Early Dynastic studies wus the 
diseovery—_in circumstances which remain unclearof the so-called Malm Deposit’, « 
hoanl of carly votive objects including the famous Scorpion and Narmer macehesds and 
he Name paleue. These provided the eacliest images of Egyptian kings, bringing lite 10 

ıe otherwise obscure royal names tested at Abydos and Naqada. They also represent 
ihe earliest expression of the classie conventions of Egypian artistic depiction, and 
indicate that these principles were formalised and canonissd at 1he very beginning Of he 
Faypian state, The complex iconography Of the palette reveals much about carly 
concsplions of kingship, whilst the quality of workmanship gives an indication of he 
sophisticated taste of he early Egy lian court Slace iis discovery, the Narmer palette has 
Sequired something of the status Of an icon of early Egypt. Today it is displayed in he 

irınce hall of the Egyptian Museum, where it serves as an admirable starting-point for 
he glories of Egypaan civilisation. The pale, together with the other Early Dynastic 
objects that had Hooded into the museum since Armdlines's work at Abydos, was 
catalogued by Quibell in his capacity as a member Of staf of he Antiquities Service. The 
wo volumes of Archaic objects (Quibcll 1904-5) represent the first published corpus of 
early nmaterial. 


Bremerton lntensifies: Petrie and Qulbell jone hy Reloner, Junker anl 
ih 


The fist tuo decades of the twentieth century witessed a substantial inerease in the 
umber of early sites excavated. Spurred on by he spectacular discoveries st Abydos and 
Hierakonpolis archneologists tamed their attention to cemeteries throughout Egypt. The 
American interest in the carly periods of Egyptian civilisation began in eamest with the 
Hearst Expedition to Egypt, direcied by Gisorge Andrew Reisner (1867-1942). From 
1901 to 1903, Relaner exeavated the sequence of cemeteries at Naga ed-Dei, a site om 
he east bank of the Nile in the Abydos region, direely opposite fhe modem town of 
Ging. Assisted fist by Green, Resh fom his exeavatons at Hierakonpolis, and 
subsequently by Arhur Mace, Reisner uncovered graves of virtually every perio at 
aga el-Deir, stretching from he early Predynastie period to modem times (Reisner 
1908; Mace 1909). The Early Dynastic period aras particularly well-represented, with 
four cemeteries covering the period of the fist three dynasties (Cemeteries 1500, 3000, 
3500 and S00). By the standards of the time, Reisner’ s excavations were conducted in 
thorough and professional manner. As well a: providing a wealth of information on Early 
Dynastic burial practices and provincial culture, fhe Naga el-Deir excavations yielded « 
few finds which indicated contacts between Ezypt and other early civilistions of he 
Near East. Contacts of some foem had already been suggested by the decoration of late 
Predynastic dlite objects (paletes and knife hndics) which included clenments of 
Mesopotamian iconography. The discovery of cylinder seals_a class of object 
indisputably Mesopotamian in origin in graves at Naga ed-Deir offered tangible 
evidence for rade berween the two eulures, 

In eoncentruting on the rich remaias of Upper Egypt, Reisner was following the 
pioneering missions of the late nineteenth century. At the end of the fist decade of the 
entieth century a change of enphasis oceurrak, and sites in the Memphite ares were 


7 اکر شر وا تھ ا ا 


investigated for the firt time. Petrie (1907) excavated a series of Early Dynastic 
mastabus 10 the south of Giza, one of which had already been lavestigatsd by Daressy 
(1905) for he Cairo Museum, However, the pioneer of archaeological investigauion in the 
Memphite area was Hermann Junker (1877-1962). He significantly enhanced the 
understanding of Early Dynastic Egypt by his work at Tura, a sile on the cast bank of the 
Nile about 10 kilometres soul of central Cairo.  wras Junkers first excavation la EY: 
and he certainly struck lucky. During tbe wînler of 1909-10, a large cemetery of some 
500 late Predynastic and Early Dynastic graves was revealed, together with a wealth of 
gave goods, particularly potery (Junker 1912), This was the first time that carly malerial 
ad bee discovered on fhe eas bank of the Nile in the Memphite region, and i paved he 
way for later excavations in the vieinity by Brunton and Suad. What made the Tura 
cemetery so important foe furure studies was its linear growth over time: the earliest 
aves were located in the souihem par of the site, fhe latest graves in the northern part 
The contents of each grave were recorded in detail this infocmmatio, ia conjunetion with 
he cemetery plan, could therefore be used to chat he development of arteliet 
assemblages over imme, and the growth of he cemetery itself. 

In 1911, responding to reports of looting by local villagers, Permie tummed his attention 
back 1o carly Egypt and 1o he extensive cemetery on the desert edge behind the hamlet of 
Kafr Tarkhan (Plate 1-3), near the entrance to the Fayum (Petrie er al. 1913; Pie 1914). 
1n two seasons of excavation, Rom 1911 to 1913, Petrie uncovered many hundreds of 
toabs dating to the very beginning of Egyptian history, including several large mudbriek 
mastabus decorated with recessed niches, in he style exemplife by the royal tomb at 
Naqada. The wealth Of grave goods she considerable light on the accomplishments of 
ihe Early Dynastic Egyptians, 


Plate 1.3 The Early Dynastic cemetery at Tarkhan 
(author's photograph). 


rly ayauie Beet 8 


particularly in the spheres of arts and crafts. A number of burials contained objects 
scribed with early royal names. Analysis of the other objects in these grves enabled 
characteristic types of pottery and stone vessels 10 be associated with the reigns of 
particular Kings. This provided useful comparative material 1o help with the dating of 
Sher tombs which did not contain any inscriptions. lust as important, Pelric's wok at 
Tarkhan enabled hin to extend his sequence dating system down to the Third Dytsty, 
dus linking the fist three dynasties with the preceling Predymastie period in one 
continuous sequence of ceramle development This built upon de Morgan's wok at 
Naqada and firmly established he cultural and historical context of the Early Dynastic 
period. 

Following his spectacularly productive excavations at Hierakonpolis, Quîbell was 
appointed 10 the post of Chie Inspector at Sagqara. His attention tummed 1o the myriad 
monuments of the Saqqara platen, and he began by excavating two small areas of he 
Early Dynastic cemetery in he years 1912 to 1914. This marked the beginning of a 
period of inensive archaeological investigation in the cemeteries of Memphis, wthich was 
o coatinue for over forty years. Quibell uncovered many tombs, including that of Hesira, 
ıa high official in the reign of Djoser Netjerikhet (Quîbell 1913, 1923). The systematic 
Excavation of Neljerikhet’s Step Pyramid complex perhaps the Gutstanding architectural 
achievement to have survived fron Early Dynastic Egypt _oceupied QuîbclPs later years 
(Firth and Quibell 1935). He directed sock at the complex fro 1931 until his death in 
1935. 


Plate 14 An élite First Dynasty tomb at North 
Saqqara (author's photograph). 


ت یھ ےہ و کے پک چ کک 
Wallaby Fh (1878-1931, who had succeeded Quibell as lospector of Antiquities at‏ 
"Saqqars in 1923. Finh conducted excavations at the complex rom 1924 to 1927, his‏ 


اتشر را تھ س ار 


results completely transforming theories about the origins of stone architecture in Egypt 
Excavation and seworstioa of the Step Pyramid complex kas continued ever since, 
yielding important infomation on many aspects of early Egypt, inehding material 
culture, architecture, kingship, he order Of suscession and, of couse, funerary religion 
Afer he handed control of the Step Pyramid exeavations to Quibell, Firth tumed his 

tention to the Early Dynastic cemetery at North Saqqara (Plate 1.4). The excavation of 
this site was to have been Firth's second major project, bur fote cruelly intervened. He 
was about lo start cleacing the cemetery when he returned 1o England on leave in 1031. 
On thejoumey home he coatracted pneumonia and within a fe days he was dead. Jt was 
ef to his young assistant, Emery, 10 carry out Frth's plans, with spectacular results, 


THE CEMETERIES OF MEMPHIS: 1936-1956 


Emery at North Saqqara 


Walker Bryan Emery (1903-71) took over as dineetor of excavations at North Saqqara in 
1935, in succession lo Firth, Rejecting the piecemeal approach to excavation pursued by 
his predecessoes, Emery decided thar only » systematic clearance of the entire cemelery 
would do the alle justice and produce the best results. He was keenly awate of the 
importance of the cemetery foe the early history of Egypt (Emery 1938: vii), and his first 
session of excavation did not disappoint, n 1936 he cleared the tab of Hemaka, which 
Firth had partially excavated five years earlier (Emery 1938). The tomb's contents 
included several masterpieces of Egy plian crafismanship, notably an inlaid gaming disk 
sand the earliest rol of papyrus ever discovered. Although uninseribed, it peoved that this 
iting medium and lerefore a cursive version of he Egyptian seipt for use oa 
papyrus _alteady existed in the First Dynasty Ia the following season of 1937-8, Emery 
nd his team excavated the earliest 1omb in the lite cemetery, number 3357, dated 10 he 
reign of Aha (Emery 1939) The Second World War interrupted work at ‘Saqqara, but 
Emery retumed to the site 10 rexconwmence exeavatioas in 1946. Another break of three 
years followed rom 1949 to 1952, before Emery was able to complete his work in the 
cemetery during the years 1952 1o 1956. The years of excavatioa suceesded in revealing 
an entire sequence of large First Dynasty tombs, strung out along the edge of he 
escarpment (Emery 1949, 1954, 1958). Emery was particularly mpcessed by the size and 
splendour of the tombs, especially by comparison with the contemporary royal tombs at 
Abydos. He formed the belief that the Saqqara tombs were the true burial places of he 
First Dynasty kings, and that the Abydos monuments excavated by Petrie were merely 
cenotapls. Thus began a long debate between Egyplologists, one which continues to this 
day. There can be no doubt that Emery’ sesults at Noh Saqgara represented ‘lhe most 
important contributions made to he histocy of e Ist Dynasty since... Pelie's 
exeavaions at Abydos (Lauer 1976:89). The numerous sesl-immpressions and lapels have 
added greally to knowledge of Early Dynastic tiles and kingship, whilst the artefacts of 
copper, stone, wood and ivory are some of the most impressive achievements of early 
Eypilin crafismanship to have survived. Emery lirmkied his excavation reports to ‘the 
hard facts" (1949: J: he imerpretation or his finds was left for a ler, semi-popular 
work (Emery 1961 Whilst some of the teories it expresses can no longer be 


Early dnutie Eat 10 


substantiated, it none the less remains an importunt sourcebook for the Early Dynastic 
period, and in particular for Emery own discoveries at North Saqqara. 

‘In contrast lo the important series of First Dynasty mastabas, he numerous minor 
toanbs of the First Dynusty, plas the Second and Third Dynasty burials excavated by 
Emery before and after the Second World War (194-9 and 1945-7), were never 
published. This is much to the detriment of Early Dynastic studies, since the later tombs, 
îi particular, yielded inponant evidence foc he evolution of mortuary architecture in the 
latter halî of the Early Dyustic period, providing a link between the First Dynasty lite 
oaibs and the mastahes of the Old Kingdon. 


Saad at Hebun 


1n his first five years at North Saqqara, up to the outbreak of ihe Second World War, 
Einery was assisted by Zaki Youssef Saad (1901-82). Saad was 1o make his own major 
ıconiwibution to Early Dynastic studies by exeavatiag the huge neeropolls across the fiver 
wat el-Mansare (Plute 1.5) (Saad named the site “Helwan” after he nearest large oun). The 
excavations lasted from 1942 1o 1954, and revealed in exeess of 10,000 graves (Saad 
T94, 1951, 1957, 1969). All bur a handful dared 10 ‘Dynasty 0" and the Early Dynastic 
period. The necropolis must have served the city Of Memphis, which lay directly opposite 
the west bank of the Nile. The sheer size of the Helwan burial ground is stagger 
and reflects the size of the capital's administrative class, even at the beginning of 
Egyptian history. Some of the tombs clearly belonged to individuals of csasiderable 
stalls (Wood 1987), almost equaling in size the contemporary 


Plate 1.5 The Early Dynastic necropolis at 
Helwan'el-Maasara (author's photograph). 


Rayplology and be rly dynastic pei. 11 


ımastabus at Noch Sagqqara (Wilkinson 19964), Unfortunately, 1o the great loss of Early 
Dynastic smudies, ihe resus of Saad's later seasons were never published (although somme 
finds from the later seasons ate discussed in Saad 1969), and the wealth of material that 
must have bee uncovered in the years 147 to 1954 remains inaceessble. 


Momer at Abu Ramah 


Jean Pierre Marie Montet (1885-1966), best known as the excavator of Tanis, directed 
work at Abu Rawash, at the northernmost ead of the Memphite necropolis, in the late 
19306, at he same time that Emery was excavating af Noh Saqqars. Montet's 
discoveries on so-called Hill M-a prominent kaol close to the edge of he cultivation 
paralleled those of Emery further south: dilte mastaba tombs of mudbriek, their façades 
decorated with recessed niches, dating to the First Dynasty (Moatct 1938, 146). The 
cemetery at Abu Rawash seems to have been used exclusively during the reign of Den, 
sand may hve served as an ‘overspill” burial ground fions North Soqqara. As at the latter 
Sile one of dhe large tombs at Abu Rawash was accompanied by two boat burials 


Lauer at he Step Prumid complet 


Afler wo years of excavation at he Step Pyramid complex, it became clear to Firth that 
he skills ofan architect were required to seassenble the mass of confusing fragments and 
reconstruct the original appearance of Nejerikhet's great funerary monument. So, in 
"1926, Firth called upon the services of the young Jean-Philippe Lauer, who has since 
develed his entire life_in a career spanning he last seventy years_to the restoration of 
the complex. Most of the architectural elements that are visible today owe their 
appearance and restoration 1o Lauer's patience and insight More than any other scholar 
Lauer has been respoasible for elucidating the history and symbolism of the Step 
Pyramid coeplex (Lauer 1936, 1939, 1962) 

Discoveries of great importance were made by Laver during the clearance of the 
galeries beneath the Step Pyramid, Particularly interesting is the hound of stone vessels 
amassed by Nejerikhet io fumish his burial. The vessels seen to have been gathered 
together Rom he royal stores as they include many inscribed for earlier Kings (Lacau and 
Lauer 1959). Nearly every king before Netjerikhet is attested, ineluding some ephemeral 
rulers unknown om other sources. Some vessels sre inscribed wilh the names of 
successive rulers, including a group of bowls bearing he names of the lst four Kiags of 
he First Dyaasty. The stone vessels fron the Step Pyramid thus comprise one of the most 
important sourees af historical information for the first two dyoasties Many vessels bear 
dinseriptioas not incised but writen in ink {Lacau and Lauer 1965). These atest the use of 
cursive seript as early as he First Dynasty already suggested by the papyrus discovered 
by Emery in he tomb of Hemaka and provide valuable insights into the workings of he 
Early Dynastic administration. They include the earliest know occurrence of the title of 
Svirier? (the executive head of the administration), and the earliest reference 1o an 
administrative division or nome, The inscriptions from the Step Pyramid complex foemm 
One of the largest bodies of easly writing fiom EgyPE 


Barly djmastie Rpt 12 


Goneln at he Sekhenkhet complet 


Zakaria Goneim (1911-59) was sespomsîble fot one of he most important and 
unexpected discoveries at Saqqurs: the unfinished Step Pyramid complex of King 
‘Sekhemkhet, the successor of Nejerikhet those own mortuary complex s0 dominates the 
Saqqara plateau. Goneim was appointed Keeper of the Saqqara necropolis in 1951 and 
almest immediately began excavations 1o 1h south-west 8F the pyramid of Unas. His 
discovery and excavation of an unknown moray complex built for a previously 
unknown king of he TRiAI Dynasty causal somelhing of a sensation (Goncin! 1951) In 
some respects, the architecture of the Sethemkhet complex is more developed than that 
ofthe Neljeriklhet monument, illustrating a gradual refinement in fhe monumental use of 
stone. A pen holder ron the chambers beneath the pyramid is inserlbed with the second 
hame of King Sekhemkhet, confirming his identification with the Djosery of he New 
Kingdom lis, Gonein’s diseovecy not only resolved onc of the outstanding problems of 
“Third Dynasty chronology, 1t also helped scholars to see the Step Pyramid complex of 
Nejerikhet in context as part of a sequence of development ia the sphere of royal 
mortuary architecture, rather Hhan as unique and unparalleled monument. 


4 change af perception 


fhe wo decades of excavation in the Memphite necropolis, Early Dynastic studies 
smuggled to keep up with the wealth of new evidence provided by archeologists 
however, despite the continuous flow of excavation reports, efiieal examination of some 
of fhe overriding issues did not cease altogether. An important transfoemation in the 
understanding and perception of Early Dynastic Egypt came with the publication of 
Emile Massoulard's book, Préhutoire er protohistalre dl Eypıe (Massoulard 1949). He 
seems 1o have been the firt scholar 1o feeognise, of a east o articulate in print, hat the 
civilisation of dynastic Egypt was largely an indigenous development, with its most 
fundamental roots in fhe culture of the Predyaastic period (Massouland 1049.333) By 
contrast, Ihe theory of the “dyastîe rice’ _a ‘master rice’ of invaders from the east, 
thought lo be respoasible foc imposing civilisation on the ‘primitive’ and unsophistieuted 
indigenous Egyptians_had been articulated by Pelrie only ten years before (Petrie 1939) 
and was stil being espoused enthusiastically by scholars such ss Emery (1961) and 
Edwards (1971) two decades after the publication of Massouland's work. The recognition 
of the indigenous roots of classic Egyptian civilisation emphasised the coatnuities 
between Predymastic and Early Dynastic culture. The achievements of the First Dynasty: 
Ji was ealised, were fhe result of a long period of cultural and political developmen; 

sher than a radically new order imposed fiom outside. This change of perceptioa 
undoubtedly ialluenced the course of Early Dynastic scholarship, and has now totally 
replaced the discredited ‘dynastic race? theory. 


Rayrlology and be erly dynastic period. 13 


A TIME OF TRANSITION: 1957-76 


The end afan era: Klasens and Eery lı the Menphlie necropolls 


From 1953 until the break in excavations in 1956, Emery was assisted at North Saqqara 
by Adolf Klasens. The following year, Klasens took his own tears 1o the northernmost 
sile of the Memphite necropolis, Abu Rawash Here, he direcled three seasons of 
exeavation for the Leiden Museu of Antiquities, fom 1957 1o 1959 (Klusens 1957, 
1958, 1959, 1960, 1961). He se-investigated the dite cemetery excavated by Montet, 
uncovering several more mastabas of fhe First Dynasty (Klasens 1961) Irmmediately 
below Hill M, at the edge of he cultivation, Klasens revealed a sequence of four Early 
Dynastic cemeteries, spanaing the period Hom Dynasty O" to the lute Second Dynasty. 
The graves yielded abundant quantties of stone vessels and poruery, including imported 
‘Syro-Palestinian jugs, providing concrete evidence for irade between Egypt and the Near 
East during the First Dynasty. One of the most significant objcels was an ivory plaque, 
originally covered in gold foil, decorsted in relief sith the head of a cow goddess (Huthot 
or, mote likely, Bat) between two ‘thunderbolt symbols of Min (Kissen, 1958-50, fig. 
2Û (o and 53, pl. XXV), This small object is an important piece of evidence for Early 
Dynastic religious iconography. 

Emery resumed his excavations in the Early Dynastic necropolis in 1964, afer an 
interval of nearly nine years. He directed his altentioa to the western part of he site, 
where he still hoped to locate the Asklepieion and fhe asociutel tomb of Imhotep 
(HSSmith 1971-199), Emery uncovered several mastabus of the Third Dyn 
overiying cult places of the Late Period, and this gave hin hope that the tomb of Imhotep 
lay nearby. The Early Dymastic tombs discovered in these seasons were published only as 
preliminary reports (Emery 1965, 1968, 1970); an analysis of Emery 's field notebooks 

ight be expected to reveal signitieant information about the development of mortuary 
architecture in the Third Dynasty. 


Polat the way: Kalser, Kaplan and Kemp 


Following the end of Klasens' exeavations at Abu Rawash and the change in emphasis of 
Emery 's worl at North Saqqara, litle archaeological interest was shown in Egypt's early 
periods throughout most of ihe 1960. The Egyptological world was largely preoccupied 
wilh the campaign o record and salvage the monuments of Lower Nubia, threntened by 
he construeton of the Aswan High Dam. Few scholars paid much atention to questions 
surrounding the origins of Egyptian civilisation, vith tro notable exceptions. 

Wemer Kaiser may be credited with the rebirth of inerest in easly Egypt. His article 
on he internal chronology of the Naqada culture (Kaiser 1957) revolutionised 
Predynastic suadies, seplactmg Pete's sequence dating system for establishing he 
relative date of Predynastic graves. A series of seminal articles in the late 1950 and early 
‘1960s (Kaiser 1959, 1960, 1961a, 1964) reviewed the ste of knowledge on early EYP 
sand investigated particular questioas relevant 1o the birth of the dynastic state. Kaiser was 
particularly interested in the possibility that the legend of a line of Kings ruling Ekypt 
before Menes might have a basis in reality, and he explored the evidence for a degree of 
political unity pelor to the beginning of the First Dynasty (Kaiser 19614). ln dong so, 


Barly dma Hyp 14 


Kaiser made an important conîbution to the peoblem of reconciling the later king lists 
wilh the names recorded on monuments of the Early Dynastic period, and he produced & 
valuable new reconstruction of the Palermo Stone, one of the key documents for early 
Egyptian history. Kaiser vas the first Eyplologis o recognise the significance of early 
serek mark, and the possibiliies of arranging then in chronological order by reference 
o the types of pots oa whieh they occurred His analysis of the Tura cenmwtery led him to 
conclude that up to ten generations of Kings had ruled a united Egypt before the reign of 
Aha (Kaiser 1964) Whilst this dramatic suggestioa can no longer be entirely sustained, 
here is no doubt that state formation was well advanced before the beginning of he First 
Dynasty, and that the credit for developing this new picture of Egypûan origins belongs 
to Kaiser. He was also the firs scholar o recognise the spread of Upper Egyptian cultural 
tras northwards during he lale Predynasic period (Kaiser 1960), and his model of 
cultural development sermains at the heart of present theories Of state formation. Kaiser's 
‘interest iw early Egypt was to have a profound impact on the direetioa taken by Egyplan 
arehacology i the 1970s and 19805. As director of the German Arehaeologieal Insite 
Jin Cairo, he was to launch major new projects at Abydos and Buto, which continue 1o 
shed new ligbt oa the Predynastie and Early Dynastic periods. However, his influence 
was not restricted to the world of German Egypıology. Kaiser's work also had a pivotal 
role in reawakening interest in he site of Hierakonpolis, one of the key sites for the rise 
Of he Egyplian state. He was the first scholar 10 re-examine the material exeavated by 
Quibell and Green at the turn of the century, and to suggest an important sole or 
Hierakonpalis ia the process of stale formation (Kaiser 1958). The publication of an 
extensive eld survey f sites in Upper and Middle Egypt revealed the extent of early 
remains at Hierakonpalis, and the great potential of the site for further stbdy (Kaiser 
1961b). As a direct result of this information, the Hierakonpolis Project was launched in 
1967 Gez below). 

Another seholar of Kaiser's generation is Peter Kaplony, His interest ies primarily in 
he fragmentary inscribed materîal t0 have survived fron early Egypt. and his pioneering 
work unlocked some of he secrets of the cariest Egyptian script fot the first time 
(Kaplony 1962, 1963, 1064, 1966), Much of what we know about Early Dynastic 
administration is based upon Kaplony's analysis of seal-impressions. 

The te 1960s witmessed 8 revival of imerest in he monuments of the first three 
dynasties, in particular the soyal tombs and funerary enclosures at Abydos. Since 
Emery 's excavations at North Saqqara, the balance of seholarly opinion had shifted in 
favour of his firm belief that he First Dynasty royal tombs were located at Sagqan, the 
monuments of Abydos being no mote than southern ‘cenotaphs'. In two articles Bary 
Kemp re-examined he evidence in favour of Abydos as the tue burial ground of Egypt's 
earliest Kings (Kemp 1966, 1967). He established beyond all reasonable doubt the claim 
of Abydos to be the Early Dynastîe royal necropolis, a view which is now shared by most 
Fgypidlogists. Kaiser picked up on Kemp's work and showed how the Step Pyramid 
complex of Negerithel, ftom the beginning of the Third Dynasty, wras selated, both 
architecturally and symbolically, 10 the lale Second Dymasty enclosures ot Peribscn and 
Khasekhemey st Abydos (Kaiser 1960) Togeder, Kemp and Kaiser coatributed 
enormously to our understanding of Early Dynastic royal mortuary complexes, and the 
process of development that led from rmustabas to pyramids. 


Rayrlology and be erly dynastic petiod 15 


New beginnings la Upper Erypt: Hierokonpolis andl Elephantine 


The late 1960s also sav the launch of two important new projects in southem Upper 
Ezy, projects that continue to reveal iunportant information about their respective sites, 
The Hierakonpolis Project, under 1he direction of Walter Fairservis (1921-94), began 
survey and excavation in 1967. Hierakonpolis had been visited sporadically by 
archaeologists since Quibell's and Gee's pioneering exeavations, but no systematic 
survey of the whole site had ever been atterpted The project was formed to examine the 
sile fom a regional perspective, establishing both the geographical and fhe chronological 
ange of the surviving archaeological material. Fairservis was primarily interested in the 
Early Dynastic period, and he began by excavating on he Kony elCiemuwia, the ancient 
tou site of Nekhen, Preliminary results indicated that he site had great polet 

flkseale expedition was launched, The early seasons of excavation yielded a spectucul 
discovery: a madtrick gateway fom a monumental building, decorıted with an elaborıte 
series of recessed niches in he ‘palace-façade’ style (Weeks 1971-2). The context of he 
saleway indicated thar the adjoining building probably served a secular purpose, aad a 
foyal residence seemed ihe most plausible explanation. This Hentifietion has bee 
generally acespted, and the building coafîims the suitability of the term ‘palsce-façale" 
$o describe the style of recessed niche decortion cormmon tn the Early Dynastic period. 
The poliical siuuatioa in the Middle East forced the abandonment of the Hicrakonpolis 
Project in 1971,10 be resumed again seven years lae: 

In 1969, a joint German-Swiss mission, under Kaiser's overall direction, began 
excavations on the island of Elephuntine, on ancient Egypl's southern border. Buildings 
of many periods have been investigated by the Elephanrine mission, inehuding important 
Early Dynastic structures. One of the most revealing sites is the sall temple of Suet, a 
shrine serving the local comunity on the island and built initially in a natural niche 
between granite boulders (Dreyer 1986). Excavations between 1973 and 1976 revealed 
ıe walls of the earliest building, dating back to the Early Dynastic period, and a large 
number of early votive objects Rom the Noor of he shrine, Together, the evidence forms 

important source for provincial cults in early Egypt. Like the Hierakonpolis Project 
the excavations at Elephantine were to yield more important fesults for The understanding 
of Early Dynastic Ezypt în subsequent seasons. 


EARLY EGYPT REDISCOVERED: 1977-90 


The Geman revtıal 


The reamvakening of scholarly interest in Egypt's Pretlynastie and Early Dynastic periods 
was driven very largely by the actives of German archaeologists, particularly fromm he 
German Archatological laste i Cairo. Wil the easing of he Middle East political 
ısîruution in 1977 and the resumptioa of foreign excavatioas, he resources of the German 
Archaeological Institute were directed towards exploring the problems of early Egypt 

rough the exeavatioa of key sites known 1o have played an important part in he proccss 
of state formation. The fist such sie, important since he very beginning of 
arehaeologieal ioterest in Egypt's early history, was Abydos. 


Bucy dni Em 16 


The Umm el-Quab 


Over seventy years afer Petrie had worked on the Umm eQaab, a thind re-exeavation 
of he Early Dynastic royal tombs was launched in 1977, under Kaiser's direction, The 
stated alm Of ihe missioa was 1o investigate the construclion of the sonmb, illuminating 
changes in royal mortuary architecture over the course of the Early Dynastie period, « 
subject which had been dealt with oaly summarily in Peuie's publications. The early 
seasons of exeavation concentred on Peie's Cemetery B, compcising the tombs of 
Ala, Narmer and their immediate predecessocs of “Dynasty 0°. The clearance of these 
tombs resulted ia a much beter understanding of he royal tomb s early development, and 
inseribed pottery froan tomb coiplex B12 has suggested t0 some the possible existence 
ofa lale Predyrastic King called “Iry-Hor, Kaiser made an important contribution to the 
history of early Egypt by suggesting an order of succession for Aha's predecessors based 
upon the early royal names incised oa vessels Clearance work in Cemetery B uncovered 
ile Predynastic Burials belonging 1o an adjacent cemetery, named Cemetery U. This 
seems to have been the burial ground of the Thlakte rulers, ancestors of the First Dynasty 
Kings. Systemaûc excavation of Cemetery U has revealed numerous tombs spanning 
almost the entire Predynastic period, Vessels from one of the late Predynastie brick -lined 
toanbs, U-s, bear ink inscriptions whieh include some of the earliest sere marks know 
from Egypt. They confim the élite status of those buried in Cemetery U, The most 
dramatic discovery was made in 1988: an cightchambered mmudbrick tomb, designated 
Uj, which is by far the largest tomb of its date anywhere in Egypt. The tomab contained « 
missive collection of imported vessels, bone labels bering he earliest writing Yet 
attested ia Egypl, and an ivory seep, syanbol of kingship. 

Concurrent with excavation of Cemetery U, clearance began of selected Fist Dynasty 
yal tombs, 1o seeond details of their coastruciioa. During clearance of the tonıb of Den, 
an impressioa fon the king's necropolis seal was discovered, whieh lists he first Ave 
kings of the First Dynasty (Narmer 10 Den) and also names the King's mother, Mermeith 
"This is the first ancient document 10 confirm the order of succession in the rs half of he 
First Dynasty, and it furher suggests that Narmer was regaled in some way as a founder 
figure by his immediate successors. Further re-cxeavalion of Do's iomb revealed he 
unique annex at the soullwestem corner, wihich seems to have housed state of the 
klag (a statue which could act as a substiute for he King's body in providing a dwelling. 
place for his spirit or ka). 1n 1988 the south-west comer of Djct's tomb was investigated 
o clurily the original appearance of the suparseructures of the royal tombs. These 
investigations discovered he vestiges of a ‘hidden’ tumulus, covering the burial chamber 
but completely enclosed within the larger superstructure, 1 fact which has dramatically 
ıehunced our knowledge of early royal moetuary architecture and vlaich raises impoant 
issues about its symbolic nature. Regular preliminary reports (Kaiser and Grossmann 
1979; Kaiser and Dreyer 1982; Dreyer 1990, 19934: Dreyer er al 1996) have presented 
she findings rom the ongoing excavations on the Ura cl Qaab. 


Bu 


In onder 1o shed light on the role of the Delta in he process of state formation, he 
German Archaeological Insitute launched a preliminary geological and archaeological 
survey of the ares around Tell el-Farr in (ancient Bulo) in 1983 (Plate 1.6 The tem, 


Fayplology and e ely dynastic period 17 


directed by Thomas von der Way, investigated the various settlement mounds (tells) in 
he vicinity and carried out s number OF dll cores to establish he whereabouts and dept 
of early oceupetional sırata; full-scale excavations began in 1985. Aided by pumping 
equipment, which Hoffman had pioneered at Hierakoapolis, son der Way and his team 
were able 1o excavate far below Ihe water table, reaching strata dating back to the early 


Plate 1.6 Tell cl-Fara'in, the site of ancient Buto in 
the north-western Nile Delta (author's 
photograph) The tents in the distance are 
those of the German Arehacologic 
Institute's expedition. 


Predynastie period (von der Way 1984, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1991; voa der Way and 
Schmidt 1985). The results were spectocular: sherds of spiral reserved slipwane 
suggested coatiets between Buto and northern Syria, whilst mmported Palestinian vessels 
indicaled trade wûth areas further south. The excavation of a second area, a litle to he 
north, from I987 to 1990, revealed s large building of the Early Dynastic period 
compeising a secles of interconnected comidor-like rooms leading to iwe central 
chumbers; it may have served a culkic purpose, perhaps connected with divîne kingship. 
‘Seakinpressions from the building dated its later pluse of occupation to the Second 
Dynasty, An earlier building in an adjacent locaton may also have had a religious 
significance, perhaps associated with she cult of a divine bull kept at Ruto. Carefl 
analysis of the pottery fiom the complete stratigraphic sequence at Buto vealed 4 
‘ansition layer’, where pottery manufactured in the indigenous, Lower Eypliaa 
tradition was superseded by poltery made according 10 the more advanced ceramic 
technology of Upper Egypt (Köhler 1992). This discovery was hailed as proof of an 
Upper Egyptian expansio believed to have characterised ihe process of stale formation 
(on der Way 1991, 1992). Although he iotecpretwtion of the ransiion layer has since 


Early amas Rpt 1 


been revised (Kêhler 1995), there is no doubt that Buto provides unique evidence for he 
technological and social changes whieh accompanied the rise of he Egyptian stale 
Excavations resumed st Buto in 1993 under fhe direction of Dina Faltings: tw date, these 
have concealed on the Predlynastie setlement levels (Falings and Köhler 196) 


Minshat Abu Omar 


During the 1960s a number of late Predynustic and Early Dynastic objects, said 1o have 
come from the northeastern Delta, had appeared on the international antiquities market 
Some were bought by the Suatiche Sammlung Agypuischer Kunst in Munich, which 
subsequently launched an exploratory survey of the Delta 10 try and loeate he source of 
he objects. As early as 1966, the site of Minshat Abu Omar was Identified for future 
excavation by the frequency of carly pottery and stone vessels oa the surfıce. The 
Munich East Delt Expedilion was launched in 1977 and excavations at Minshat Abu 
Omar began in 1978, continuing until 1991, under the direction of Dietrich Wildung and 
Karla Kroeper (Kroeper and Wildung I985, 1094; Kıvcper 1088, 1992, 1996). A 
cemetery spanning the te Predynastic and First Dynasty periods was revealed, 
compcising somme 420 graves. Close contacts with southem Palestine were indicated by 
imported vessels in some of the tombs. The richest grave in the entire cemetery was 
further distinguished by s unique architectural feature: signs of recessed niche decoration 
on he lmner faces of three walls. The use of ‘palace-façade’ decoration in a location 
whieh woul have been invisible afler the burial illustrates the strength of the symbolism 
inherent in this style of architecture, Moreover, the identification of the tomb owner as 4 
Child of nine has important impliciions or the social structure of the local cormmuni 
which seems to have been charseterised by hereditary stalus even after the fouadatioa of 
he Fayptan stale 


enshve excavation thrwugihou Etypt 


The northeastern Delta 


The suecess of the Munich East Delta Expedition proved that good results could be 
obtained fom excavating in the Delt, and prompted other archaeological missions 1o 
investigate the region for early sites. An expediion of Amsterdam University, directed by 
Edwin van den Brink, conducted four sessons of gev-arehseologieal survey in the north 
eastern Delta beween 1984 and 1987, identifying eight Early Dynastic sites (van den 
Brink 1989). Soundings at Tell eklswid Soul revealed a selement spanning he 
sransition belween the lale Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods, whilst coatempocary 
Cemetery and setlement material was excavate at ıe nearby site of Tell brahim Awad 
Jin three seasons fiom 1988 to 1990. The level dating to the period of stale formation 
yielded several sherls incised wîth carly royal names, including the sereths of ‘Ka and 
Narmer. Aa Italian mission condluctsd small-seale excavations at nearby Tell el-Farklha it 
1988 and 1989, revealing mudbrick buildings 0f the Early Dyrastic and Old Kingdom 
periods, whilst excavations by the University of Zagazig at E2bet e1-TelKufur Nig in 
he late 19805 uncovered a substantial cemetery of the carly First Dynasty. The upsurge 
ofimerest in the archaeology of the Delta particularly in the early periods—veas marked 


Fayrlology and te erly dynastic period 19 


by a symposium held at the Duteh Institute ia Cairo in 1986, The publication of the 
proceedings fom this meeing (van den Beink 1988) sparked further interest in the 
potential of the Delta to reveal important information about the process of state 
formation, a potential vihich is inereasingly being realised. 


Abydos 


Whilst he German Archaeological lastitute has been excavating on the Uns cl-Quab, an 
American team under the overall direetion of David O'Coanor has concentrated on he 
accompanying funerary enclosures on the low desert nearer the culivation. A hew 
Clearance of the area in 1988 yielded firm evidence of a built structure within he 
enclosure of Djer, previously demarcated only by a rectangle of subsidiary tombs 
(O'Connor 1989 This discovery links the enclosures of the carly First Dynasty with 
heir luler counterparts, and enhances our understanding of Early Dynastic royal mortuary 
architecture, Even more striking was another discovery made in lhe sume season 
Excavations within the funerary enclosure of Khasekhemwy (the Shunet ez-Zeblb) 
sevealed he lower courses of a mudbrick mound in the cene of the enclosure. 
Reconstructed as a substantial massif with sloping sides, this feture has been dubbed û 
‘protopyramid (O'Coanor 1991, 1995). The funerary enclosure of Khasekhemwvy 
seems, therefore, 1o have foreshidowed in many ways the architecture of he Step 
Pyramid complex, built in the following reign. The recent discoveries at Abydos have 
hghlighted the step-by-step development of royal mortuary architecture during the Eacly 
Dynastic period, and the staking links berween the lue Second and ently Third 
Dynasties 


Hierakoapolis 


Archaeological wok resumed at Hierakonpolis in 1978 with he excavation of he temple 
area of he early town, The complex stratigraphy of the temple, published in a rather 
Confusing manner by Quîbell and Green, was clarified, peoving beyond doubt that the 
scireular stone revetment identified as The carly temple platforms did indeed date boek to 
ihe beginning of the Early Dynastic period. Fairservis returned to Hierakonpolis in 1981 
for a final season of excavation as director, concentrating on the Early Dynastic buildings 
east of the niced gatesray. Other commitments forced inn to hand over direction of he 
entire project 10 Michael Hoffman (194490), who subsequently followed his ow 
particular interests and sought 1o illuminate the diverse Predyastic activity ia he 
Hierakonpolis region. One of the most important sites investigated by Hoffman's 
Predynastic Research Team is the elle cemetery at Locality 6. Between 1979 and 1985, 
excavations revealed higlstatus burials fon Naqada 1 and the period of state formation, 
Hofman even speculated that the largest tomb, numbered 1, may have been the burial of 
King ‘Seocpion', whose ceremonial macehead was found in the ‘Main Deposit’ at 
Hierakonpolis 1 he tur of the century. 


Bucy dati E 20 


Elephantine 


Excavations at Elephantine from 1981 to 1988 revealed the extent and development of 
the Early Dynastic town, providing an important picture of provincial Iife early in the 
history of the Egyptian stale. Equally significant was the discovery of a substantial 
fortress, bull on the eastern ege of the island st the very beginning of the Fist Dynasty 
(Ziemann 1993) The fortress clearly represents a state-sponsored project lo secure 
Egypt's souiherm froatier and provide s base fron which to launch punitive expeditions 
against Lower Nubia. The constmyctio and subsequent strengthening of the fortress had 3 
major impact oa the life of the local cormmmunity and provides a striking illustration of he 
realities of power in the Early Dynastic period namely, the absolute authority of he 
central government from the earliest times, aad its blatant disregard for Iocal sensibilities 
iPihese threatened o impede court initiatives (Seidlmmayer 1960 


AN INTERNATIONAL EFFORT: THE 1900s AND BEYOND 


"A century afer the discovery of Early Dyaastic Egypt, seholatly interest in the formative 
period of Egyptian civilisation is probably stronger than at any time over the last one 
ndred years An unpcecsdeted umber of archaeological missions from a wide variety 
of countries are excavating throughout Egypt at sites wiih Predynaste andlor Early 
Dynastic material. Following the success of the missioas to Minshut Abu Omar and Buin, 
ıa particular focus in the lute 180s and 1990s has been the archaeology of the Deka. This 
ietest was refleetal in an international conference held at the Netherlands Institute in 
Cairo in 1990, devoted specifcally to the topic of the Nile Delta during the period of 
sate formation. The published proceedings (van den Brink 1992) included reports from 
excavations conducted some time ago, such as the Egyptian Aatiquities Organisation 
excavations at Beni Amir carried out in the lute 19608 and the 19705, ss well as the 
seule Of recent o¢ ongoing missions. Thus, a large body of new, and impodant 
information concerning Lower Egypt in the late Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods 
has been made available to scholars, A particular focus of he meeting and publiihed 
proceedings was the evidence for connections berween Egypt and southern Palestine. The 
fesals of lseaelî exeavations at sles such as Tel Erni and En Besor indicate substantial 
Ezyptlan activity in souhers Pulestine during the late Predymasie 1o Early Dymastie 
ıransition, possibly extending to an Egyptian presence st the two sites, This evidence has 
necessuted a reassessment of Egypt s carly foreign relations, and suggests shut the 
phenomenon of core and petiplhery associated with the rise of other early states was also 
ûû feature of sote foamation in Egypt. Excavations at Early Broaze Age sites in southern 
Palestine, particularly in the Negev Desert, continue to yield evidence for contacts with 
Eyl as llustrated by the discovery of 3 sherd bearing the seref of Narmer st Nahal 
“Tillah in 1995 (Levy er al 19905), 

The growing inierest in early Egypt was also marked in 1993 by the opening of a new 
gallery at he Bftish Museum in London especially dedicated to the farmunive period of 
Faypilan civilisation (Spencer 1993, and by ihe holding of an intemational conference 
here on the same theme (Spencer 1996). As archaeolagieal missions i Egypt make 
increasing use of specialist expenise- ftom ceramieists to arthaco-botanista, geologists 
to palaeo-pathologiste the level of detailed information gained from excavations 


Rayplology and be rly dynastic pei. 21 


increases accordingly. Specific aspects of early Egyptian culture and society are now Tar 
more amenable to investigation an ever before. Yet some maj problems remain t0 be 
ısolvel, not least the chronology of the Secoad and Third Dynasties. As the study of Early 
Dynastic Egypt enters ts second century, excavations both long-established and new 
continue to yield exciting new infomation. The most significant of these projects are 
described briefly below 

Tuo separate missions promise to shed new light on Egypt's fist capital, Memphis, 
sand its maln cemetery, Saqqara, in the Early Dynastic period. The Egypt Exploration 
Sociely's ongoing Survey of Memphis, directed by David Jeflieys, hus established he 
probable course of the Nile ia the Early Dynastic period, ccasiderably further west than 
lils present course. Extensive drill cares have succezded in pin-pointing the most probable 
location for the Early Dynastic city which, it is hoped, may be revealed by future 
excavations, The National Museums of Scotland Saqqara Survey Project, directed by lan 
Mathieson, has used sophisticated semole sensing techniques, xaeluding magnetometry 
and resistivity, to map structures oa the Saqqara plateau which lie hidden beneath deep 
accumulations Of drift sand, A survey of this type and limited test excavations have bee 
conducted at the mysterious ‘Crest Enclosure’, or Gis el-Mudir in the desert o the west 
of he Sup Pyramid complies. They have coafirmed thar he enclosure is not sn 
unfinished step pyramid complex of the Third Dynasty, but rather a structure reminiscent 
of the First Dynasty funerary enclosures at Abydos Furthermore, he construction of he 
Great Enclosure suggests that i pre-dates the Step Pyramid complex, and is probobly he 
oldest substantial stone building a Egypt The idendly of its owner is sill 4 mystery, but 
may be solved by future excavation. 

‘Further iomportant and unexpected discoveries have been made in the vicinity of the 
Abydos funerary enclosures. Clearance of the area adjacent to Khasekhemuy’'s enclosure 
(the Shunet ez-Zebib) i 1991 revealed a ect of welve boat burials, moored alongside 
he weste wall of the enclosure. The date of these unparalleled structures remains 
uncertain: their location would suggest a date contemporary with the Shunet ez-Zebîl, 
but hey may be earlier (O'Connor 1095). First Dynasty diite burials at Abu Ravrash, 
Saqqara and Helwan were oceusionally accompanied by boat burials, but such features 
have not previously been found in association with the moray complexes of kings 
Once again, ew material has forced a rethiak of Early Dynastic beliels and practices. 

A short distance away oa the Umm elLQush, he rwexeavation of Khasekhemwy's 
ıtoeb promises to clarify the design of he royal tomb at the end of the Second Dynusty, 
Jon the threshold of he pyramid age. Seal-impressions fron the toni entrance, discovered 
in 1996, seem 1o indicate that NejerikleVDjoser was Khasekhenmwy’s immediate 
successor, confirming previous suspicions and solving one of he peineipal peoblems of 
Early Dynase chronology. Another important conurîbutioa was made by discoveries ia 
he tomb of Qaa, cleared i 1991 and 1992. An impression ftom the necropolis seal of 
Qua lists all eight kings of the First Dynasty in heir expected order, confirming the 
sesults of painstaking research over decades, snd emphasising Narmer's position at the 
hend of the First Dynasty. Sealimpeessions ûf Hetepsekhemy fromm chanbers near the 
soaib entrance clarify the succession at the end of fhe Firs Dynasty, but do not explain 
why ihe Kings of ihe Second Dynasly chose t0 move fhe soyal necropolis north 1o 
Saqqara, Finally, the sifting of Potrie's spoil-dumps fiom the tonnbs n Cemetery B has 


Barly dynastic EI. 22 


shel of Narmer identified by the same 


yielded some significant fads, including a year 
ent as is depicted on the king's famous plete. 

Wath these lalest results from the royal tombs at Abydos, the discovery of Early 
Dynastic Egypt has come ful circle. Archaeologists woeking st the end of the wrentieth 
century al site fist excavated û century befoce continue to shed new light on The carliest 
period of Egyptian history. The chapters that follow seek to make sease of the wealth of 
evidence about early Egypt now available to scholars, and to present it ia a cohereat and 
accessible fashion. WIilst the most recent discoveries om the Nile valley have been 
uilised in this explorution of Early Dynastic Egypt, there is ile doubt that our 
understanding of early Egyptian society will continue to develop in the light of fresh 


evidence. 
سد سیه‎ 

س ص ا ا 
ال ا E‏ 
ا oj am‏ 

ست ١‏ کا و س 
e‏ 5 
e | arpa‏ 2 

E ا‎ 

ست | سے ا ی 

ا 
س 2 ج 
RIES E ES‏ 

2 ENE == 


Chronological chart of the late Predlynastie andl Early 
Dynastic periods. 


CHAPTER TWO 
BIRTH OF A NATION STATE 


INEQUALITY IN LIFE AND DEATH 


Ancient Egypt gives the impression of having been obsessed with status. From the 
hierarehleal sealing seen in relief decorion to the sentiments expressed in ‘wisdom 
Iiterature', Egyplian civilisation made constant reference to rank, and the iahabitants of 
the Nile valley seem 10 have been acutely conscious of their relative position within the 
pyramidal stnucture of society, The formation of the Egyptiun state at the end of he 
Tourn millennium BC crystallised social distinctions in a particularly marked way, 
placing the king at the apex of the pyramid, almost removed Rom the human sphere: 
Beneath hirs the ruling lite, minor oflicials and peasant frmers occupied progressively 
lower and larger tiers. Above al, therefore, it was the socic-ceonomie dynamic within 
Predynastic Egyptian society which led ultimately 1o the Birth of Egypt as a nation stale. 
The structure of Egyptian society in the historie period may be seen as an extreme 
manifestation of inequality. but the roots of the phenomenon go Daek 10 the earliest 
Ssermled culkures of the Nile valley. 

For most of ihe Predynastic period, society in Lower Egypt seems to have been 
relatively egalitarian. There is linle mortuary evidence foc status differentiation (Rizkana 
And Secher 1989:80) so if social hierarchies did exist they were not reflected ia burial 
practices. An exception to this general picture is a grave (A35) fon the sile of el. Omari, 
hated by radiocarboa toc. 4600 4400 BC (Debono and Mortensen 1990:81), bur perhaps 
somewhat ler, closer to ¢. 4100 BC (F.A. Hassan 19951674), The burial of an adult male 
Contained a carved wooden staff (Debono and Mortensen i990,67, pls 28.1 and 43.2) 
which is generally interpreted as a symbol of office (Hoffman 1980.196; FA. Hassan 
19951674: for a more cautious view see Debono and Moqensen 1990:75), although the 
other gave goods do not seem to indicate particular wealth or status. However, despite 
he greater propensity for display st ekOma than i other Lower Egyplian communities 
(reflected in the frequency of imparted ommaments), the settlement material indicates an 
egalitarian social sirueture based on The family unit (Hoffman 1980-195). It is likely that 
ihe man buried with a staf was someone with special power and prestige, hough nt 
necessarily of a political or economic nature. 

In contrast to Lower Egypt, Upper Egyptian society seers to have been characterised 
by hierarchies as far back as the Badariun period (¢ 4500-. 3800 BC). Badarian graves 
show variation in their size and wealth, indicating that different levels of status were 
accorded to the deceased (Anderson 1992). Mortuary practices generally reflect aspecls 
of living society but note the reservations expressed by Friedman 19942), and we 
may assume that within Badarian cormnmuaities certaia individuals enjoyed greet status 
and he preferential secess to resources which went with it The presence of local ites is 
wen more apparent in the mocmuary eon of the Naqada 1 period The differentiation of 
aves in tems of size and number of grave goods is marked, and some graves were 


Early dma Hap 24 


fumishedl with luxury or imported items. For example, a Naqada 1 grave at Matmar 
(number 3075) coatalned no less than I potery vessels, the largest number of any 
contemporary burial in the local cemetery (Wilkinson 196b: 75) In additioa, he 
eontents ineluded an ivory tag, bracelets and an ostrich eggshell (Bruton 1948: pl XY 
At seven sites in Upper Egypt, paricular graves were furnished with distinctive 
artefacts which may be termed “Badges of status < Most cormmmoa are maceheads, found in 
five Naqada I grıves at Makasns (numbers 6, 23, 29, 39 and 41) and one a el-Amra 
(number 144); but a grave of he same date al Matmar (number 3131) contained a fine 
axe, one of the earliest examples of advanced metalvorking Rom Egypt (Brunton 1944: 
pl XVIAT). Such a care object would undoubtedly have confecred great prestige and 
feilects the status of its ovmmer within the local Predynastic community. The strutifed 
ature of Upper Egypeian society in the Naqada 1 period is also highlighted by the 
presence, in ceain graves, of objects which seer to indicate a. special role foe the tomb 
emer, though not necessarily a position of political power. Two burials ar Makasna 
(numbers 33 and 42) each contained a female figurine made from clay (Ayrton and Loat 
1911:1314) These almost certainly possessed some magical or religious significance, 

nd their inclusion amongst a deceased person's grave goods prnbubly ndicutes special 
status. Significantly, one of The grives (number 33) also yielded a vessel of Pelie's 
blsek-ineised ware, a rare class of pottery probably impoded from Nubia (Needi 
"1984.224; but cf. Bourrins 198123). 

Within any community, ite status may be conferred on an individual ia one of two 
ways. I may either be achleved__flut is, gained by an individual ae a result of his or her 
actions or inherited, hat is ascribed orm birth as a result of descent (Renfrew and Baha 
TS91:176). In general, inherited status is considered to be a characteristic of more 
complex societies in Which the heredity principle operates to the beneft of a restricted 
dle (Bard 1988-52). The change fromm scbieved 1o aheriied status ss he pcimary means 
of distinguishing a privileged class marks an important stage in socioeconomic 
development. ln the Egyptian case, kingship that hallrmaek of Egyptian civilisation 
would not have existed without the heredity principle. Ifthe Predynastic period is seen as 
ıa precursor 1o dynastic Egy, a long trajectory wilh the end-point being he codification 
of ceran cultural ails, then he earliest evidence of inberlked stanus is an important 
milestone. Burials of the Badarian period show no signs of iaherited status, in marked 
contrast 10 the mortuary record of the following Naqada 1 period. A grave at Mahusna 
(number 41) belonged to a family group, consisting of a man, a woman and a child. The 
whole family obviously enjoyed a privileged position in the cal community, since the 
gave gods Included s female gurine, several ivory objects, gold aa silver beads, and 
û diorite mmacehead (Ayton and Loar 1911:16) Elaborate child burials are the clearest 
evidence of inherited stalus, since for there to be greater expenditure of time and 
resourses on the burial of a child than of an adult must indicate thst 1he child oceupial an 
exalted position within the local community, and this could only have come about 
ıheough descent. The largest Naqada 1 grave al Amant (number 1461) was identified as 
belonging to a child (Mond and Myers 1937:28), and the status of the deceased is also 
reflected in the grve goods, which included wo ivory wands. The Predynastie 
Community buried at Amant seems 1o have been a small, uadisinguished farming 
village, removed from he growing centres of political power at sites like Hierakonpolis 


and ThisAbydos. None the less, status was clearly inherited by some members of dhe 
Community, ss early as the Naqada 1 period 

"In the following Kaqada Il period (. 3500-e. 1200 BC), social differentiation becomes 
even more apparent in the mortuary record of Upper Egypt Badges of status continued to 
be buried with important individuals. For example, large grave of Naqada IIb (e, 3500 
ıe. 400 BC) at Matar (number 3129) contained a maceheud male from travertine as 
ell as hwo stone vessels (Brunton 1948: pls X, XIILB-2), rare at sueh an early date. A 
contemporary burial at Armant (aunber 1466] was furmitaed with a number of unusual 
artefacts, including a gazelle skull, three painted hjects made Of plaster and a bed, A 
second grave in ihe same cemetery also contained a bed and it has been suggested that 
both burials may have belonged to leaders of the local village (Bard 1988:52), Country- 
“wide, the wealth of burials iscreases in the Naqada II period. both in teens of the number 
of objects iatermed ith the deceased and their costliness (Bard 1988; Scidlmayer 1988; 
Wilkinson 1996). Thus, in the Predynastie cemetery at elAmra south of Abydos 
(Randall-Maclver and Mace 1902), graves of Naqada Il were commonly fumished with 
palettes, jewelery and items made from prestige materials sueh as Ivory, lapis lazuli, 
Copper, silver and gold (WKinson 1993: 183). Agaia, elaborate child burials point to 4 
raked society wilh inherited status. The wealthiest carly grave (number 66) ia the Tor 
cemetery at Hicrakoapolisa cemetery representing the local population ftom wich the 
dle had aleeady been separated, to be buried i discrete areas was identified as 
belonging to a child The arlefocts in the grave included 24 pottery vessels, palettes and 
copper cbjects (B.Adams 1987167-8). As Egypt progressed on the path 1 stalehood, 
social disinetions became greater and these became increasingly explicit in the mortuary 
Secord. By the end Of the Predynastie period, Joeal lites now soyal families in every 
sense__had successfully monopolised the economic resources ia thekr territories to such 
ûn extent that they were able lo command suflicient labour to construct monumental 
toaibs. Moreover, they could call upoa the services of professional administrators to 
obtain prestige goods fom abroad by longdistunce trade, and employed skilled 
craftsmen to manufacture further elaborate grave goods, The bith of the Egyptian state 
wih its rigid hierarchies can therefore be charted in the growing diflerendation and 
welaboralion of mortuary provision. 


“THE ICONOGRAPHY AND IDEOLOGY OF RULE 


Power can be expressed in many rays, both explicit and subtle. One of the most eflecive 
ways of appealing 1o people's deeper feclings is through art. A repertoire of distinctive 
symbols, employed in a consistent and highly symbolic way (ieonography) was a feature 
OF Ezyptian kingship Hon the earliest timmes. The series of carved stone palettes and Nor 
kaile handles ftom he late Predynastie period are well Known examples of royal 
îepnography (Wiliams and Logan 1987; Davis 1989, esp. 141-9, fgs 69-14 Cialowiez 
1991), Some motik are borrowed from contemporary Mesopotamian iconography 
(Boehmer 1974; Teissier 1987; HS Smith 1992 plus references), but the Iotal 
composiions reflect a peculiarly Egyptian view of mule. The King is presented in animal 
form, emphasising boll his coercive power and the concentration of the powers of nature 
in his person. By the end of the Predynastie period, many of the charcteristies of 


Rely aie BE 6 


Egyptian art had already been canonised, including the conventions off sepresentation, the 
hierarchical sealing of figures, the use of registers to order the composition, and he 
atributes of kingship. However, the rots of royal iconography and of the leology it 
expresses go back much further. 

"At the end of the Kaqada 1 period (e. 1500 BC) we have the fist indications that an 
ideology of power was being formulated by the ruling lineages of Upper Egypt 
1eoaography is he articulation of beliefs through the medium of ant, and the eurliest 
example of royal iconography reeognisable as such fom later parsllcls-morks the 
beginning of a phase of rapid social change whic, with sceclerating speed, led 1o the 
emergence of classic Kingship ideology Within the space of some wo hundred sean. 
Recent excavations in the earliest part of the Predynastie Cemetery U at Abydos have 
revealed some astonishing examples of Naqada 1 crafismanship, in graves vlhich clearly 
belonged to persons of high status. Tie burial of a prematuce baby (U-S02) was furmishel 
wilh an elaborate potery vessel of unique appearance: eight fenmale gurine, modelled 
iin clay, are arranged around the rim of the bowl, holding hands; cach figure is distinctive, 
sand tesces of bitumen wigs survived. Three larger, male figurines found in the same grave 
ımay once have decorate a similar bowl (Dreyer 1996). Most stiking of all, however, 
was a vessel from another comtemporary grave. On a red background, the decoration is 
offwfhite paint included a seene of peegnant women, and a male figure wearing a tail and 
wil a feuiher on his head, holding a mmce in the classic smiting pose of later royal 
iconography (Dreyer 19954), is hard to ioterpret his latter motif as anything other than 
the depiction of a nuler, so close are the parallels with royal scenes on rmonuments fon 
he period of state formation. To dale, he Abydos vessel is the earliest example of the 
ruler figure in Egyptian art. Jt highlights not only the high standard of craftsmanship 
available 1o Upper Egyptian rulers, but also the ideological sophistication of the 
miniature courts thst must have surrounded such individuals, 

The most extensive example of early royal iconography is the series of seenes painted 
Jon the intemal walls of an Ghte tomb a Hierakonpelis, numbered by its excavators tomb 
"100 and dubbed ‘the painted tomb” (Quîbell and Cirez 1902: pls LXXV-LXXIX: Case 
and Payne 1962; Payne 1973; Kenp 1973). Situated in a Naqada II cemetery south of the 
prehistoric tour of Hierakonpolis and close to he cultivation, the painted tomb was one 
Fa number OF high-status burials in the cemetery, but was apparently unique in having 
pained decoration. The scenes covered one long wall and a cross wall hal the width of 
he tomb. The scenes have been illustrated and reproduced many times since their 
discovery (for example, W.S Smith 1949-124, ig. 43; 1981-31, fig. 9, Spencer 190336- 
7, fig. 30, and their iamportance lies not only in the soyal nature of much of the 
iconography but also in the Mesopotamian influence apparent in somme of the motifs. The 
Predynustic rulers of Upper Egypt, when formulating s distinctive iconography of rule, 
seem 1o have borrowed various clements fom contemporary Mesopotamian culnure 
Moi such as the master of the beasts" her figure stindisg between and reconciling 
ıo opposing wild animals, usually lioas__are found on other royal artefacts fom hte 
Predyhastic Fay, but this particular motif makes ts fest appearance in Egyptian art i 
the Hierakonpolis painted tab, which has been dated by its pottery to Naqada Ile (e 
3400 BC) (Case and Payne 1962), The main scene on the long wall shows a procession of 
boats, one of which is provided with an awning amidships, sheltering a igure who is 
probably the ruler and he person for whom the tomb was bull A more explicit 


indication of royalty is the motif of the ruler smiting a group of bound captives, clearly 
already established in Egy pian iconography as the expression of kingship pur ererllence. 
The Hierakonpolis paioted tomb illustrates the extent of socio-political development in 
Upper Egypt since the end of the Naqada 1 period (when the Abydos painted vessel was 
male foc a local ruler of This). Difterent artisie motifs depicting the ruler engaged in 
Yarious selivides_ineluding  riual water-bome procession, perhaps an ancestor of 
some of the later festivals of kingship were being woven into a more highly developed 
ieonographic repertoire which sought to express the muiple roles of he King in relation 
to his people and he supematural realm. What is striking about the seenes in he 
Hierakenpalis painted tommp is the nurber of features charsetecistie OF classie Egyptian 
art in the hisiocic period that are already present some three hundred years before the 
beginning of the First Dynasty. 

"A similar set of scenes and motif, with at least one important addition, is depicted o 
ıa painted cloth from a broadly comtetnporary lite grave st Gebelein (Calaissi 1955-5-42, 
pl. 1; Aldred 1965:39, fig. 28). The grave has never been published in detail, and only 
fingments of the painted clota now survive (in he Egyptian Museum, Turin), but i is 
clear that it must have belonged to an individual of considerable status, probably a local 
fuler. A procession of boats and a rial dance formed major parts of the original 
decorative scheme, while a detached fragment of cloth shows a hippopotamus being 
hapooned (Galass 1955:10, fig. 5, pl. 1 [top]; Behrman 1989: Dok 4). la Nistorie 
imes, he hunting of the hippopotamus was imbued with great religious significance, and 
here ure several references to the activity from he reign of Den in the middle of he First 
Dynasty. would appear that, in early times at least, hippopotamus hunting had a special 
comertion with kingship. The Gebclein painted cloth is one of the earliest anested 
depictions of this event, and further emphasises the Iikely royal status of the object's 
original owner. 

Both he Hierakonpolis painted tomb and the Gebeiein painted cloth show close 
saylisie similarities to a contemporary class of Upper Egyptian pottery produced by 
specialist powers. This is Peie's decorsted rare, comprising closed vessels of marl 
Clay, red 1o a pale bul colour and decoeted on he ouside wit scenes painted in red 
ıechre (Bouriau 1981.269; Needier 1984-20211). The earliest devorated ware appears 
in graves al the beginning of Naqada 11 (e. 3500 BC) and remains a distinctive feature of 
he Upper Egyptian funerary ceramic repertoire until carly Naqada Ill (¢. 3200 BC) 
Some examples are decorated with pattems of dots or spirsls, in imitation of stone 
vessels, Others bear figurative decoration: floea, fauna (principally binds, bur also animals 
such ss crocodiles), and more complex rial scenes involving humus figures in 
distinetive postures and ships with many oars, This lanier type of decorstion— probably 
he output OF 3 fes specialist workshops _.is ich in symbolism and must have conveyed 
some Hleologieal meaning both to those who created the vessels and those who received 
hem. We cannot be certain of their precise significance, but they seem to hint at he 
relationship between the hunmn, natural and supernatural spheres. This heme wras also 
explored in the emergent ideology of divine Hngship being formulated ia Naqad 1l 
Upper Eaypt. 


Barly dynastic Hap 28 


TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIAL CHANGE 


As well as illuserating developments ia iconography and ideology, decorated rare is an 
important indicator of another sphere where profound changes were taking place in the 
courts of Upper Egypt: technology. The rise of local dli, attested fiom carly 
Predynustic times, accompanied increasing social stratification and craf specialisation. 
Elites require prestige objects with whic to display heir social and ceonomie status, 
which in tum requires dedicated, fulltime specialists to make such objects, As he 
economic ialluence of certain individuals within a community ineceased, so did their 
power of patronage. A local ruler, with more agricultural produce a his disposal than was 
ecessary for mere subsistence, could afford to emplay craftsmen on a permanent basis, 
providing foc them out of his surplus income. The relese of a growing number of people 
Thom agricultural production and their engagement in specialist production brought with 
it major technological aclvanees, as new skills were developed and old ones passed dowra 
fiom generuion to generation. The development of carly metalworking and the 
unsurpassed ability of the carly Egyptians to fishin elaborate vessels from somme of the 
hardest stones were the result of Fredynastic socis-economie trends which facilitated 
ıcraf specialisation. 

Poery is abundant in Predynastie contexts. Hence, the technological development 
whieh is the easiest to trace in the archaeological record is the oe that occurred in the 
sphere ol ceramic production. During the transition ftom Naqad Ito Naqada 1l (e. 3550. 
€. 450 BC), hand-made potery with a high degree of variation was swiftly replaced in 
Upper Egyplian seldlements by Peuie's rough wrare, ils grenter uniformity and rapid 
domination of the ceramic repertoire being signs of mass production (Friedman 
1992204, a. 8 and 1984: Adams and Frisdman 1902.327}. This fundamenal change 
marks the beginning of a process that was eventually 10 take hold throughout Egypt, 
binging wilh i important socioeconomic developments. Until the begianing of he 

faqada 1 period, pottery in the Nîle valley was made exclusively from alluvial clays, 
These have The advantage of being easy io work. shape and fire, sequiring only primitive 
technology available at the household level. Mast of the potery Rom Badin and 
Naqada 1 siles was probably made in this smallscale way. There is evidence fon 
Hierakonpolis of specialist, pottery production as early ss the Naqada 1 period 
(RFriedman 1994401), but this is unusual, reflecting the advanced state of social 
ıaralilicaion and craft specialisation at Hierakonpolis, The output of the Hicrakonpolis 
Kilns seems to have been iotended primerily fo funerary consumption, probably grave 
goods for the local ile buried în large tombs at Loealiry 6 (Hoffman 1982; B.Adans 
996). This type of specialist workshop became much more common fron the beginning 
of Naqada I, and was marked by he advent of a more conmplex ceramic technology, 
producing vessels of a nev and distinctive type. Pots made from desert or marl clays 
fequire much more contlled firing conditions than vessels made from alluvial clays. 
The kiln must alko reach a far higher temperature for the process to be successful. The 
appearance of decorated vrare amade fromm marl clay-in the ceramic repertoire of Upper 
Faypt sepresents a major technological advance, one which seems to have been made 
possible by the increasing activity of specialist pollens, 


The production of pottery fof a market by professional workshops had a profound 
impact upon methods of disibution snd exchange in Predynasûe Egypt. In the 
archaeological record, one of the most stiking phenomena is the spread of Upper 
Eytan cecamie technology norlwards during he later pact of the Naqada 1I period 
(Kaiser 1956, 1990; Kemp 1905.682). By Naqada 1lc (c. 3400-. 3300 BC), pottery made 
in classie Upper Eyptian fashion appears in graves at sites such as Haraga and Gira, 
near the entrance to the Fayum; whilst by Naqada Id? (. 3300-., 3200 BC) it has spread 
o sles in the exuemiies of the Deka like Buto and Minhat Abu Omar This 
phenomenon has been interpreted as a broader ‘cultural superposition’, reflecting a 
orthward expansion of Upper Egyptian euluural characteristics, 1f not people (von der 
Way 1991). However, this may be an over-ambious reading of the evidence, which 
merely anests he gradual displacement of indigenous, Lower Egypuan patterns of 
ceramic production, distribution and exchange by patteras developed in Upper Eaypt 
(Kûhler 1993:2534 and 1995; ef Kemp 1995.683). Three factors may be sat work in this 
process. First, the technological superiority of Upper Egyptian pottery, which must have 
Made it attractive to the inhabitants of Lower Egypt Second, he marl clays used to make 
dococated ware and other specialist ceramics, such as the class of wavy-handled jars 
imitating ieıported Palestinian forms, were probably restricted to Upper Egypt where the 
advanced firing technology required 1o make marl potery was first developed, Third, we 
may speculate that the specialist pottery workshops of Upper Egypt were keen to seek out 
new markets for their products, and the thriving communities of the Delta seen 1o have 
provided them. Certainly, the Predynastic graves at Minshat Abu Omar in the north. 
Castern Delta were furnished with potery almost entirely in the Upper Egyptian style, 
giving rise 1o the evry that Minshat was an Upper Egyptian ‘colony site” (Kemp 
905:687; ef Kaiser 1987), perhaps established to conduct trade with Palestine. Vessels 
made from marl clay probably repeesent imports ftom Upper Faypt 

The spread of Upper Egyptian patteras of ceramic peodueion, distribution and 
exchange norhvards during lale Neqada I accompanied other _ socioeconomic 
developments which fundamentally changed he character of Lower Egyptian society. 
For the whole oF the Predynastic period prior 1o lute Naqada Il, Lower Eeypt seems 1 
have been characterised by a generally egalitarian social structure. Fro the period 
before the advent of Upper Egyptian cultural characteristics, four substantial cemeteries 
have been excavated in Lower Egypt: at Heliopolis south (Debono snd Mortensen I988), 
Mandi and Wadi Digla (Rizkana and Secher 1990), and es-SafT (Habachi and Kaiser 
1985), The individual burials vary litle in their size or wealth, and ia general were 
famished wilh fw grave goods, There are certainly none of he prestige ateliels 
commonly fund in contemporary Upper Egyptian graves. Fron the beginning of Naqada, 

(e. 3200 BC, however, this picture changes. A Minshar Abu Omar, he orientation of 
burials alters, bodies being laid on their left side rather than their sight side (Krveper 
1988:1213). A simultaneous change in the podery repertoire reinforees fhe division 
between earlier and later phases, indicating perhaps a change in the nature of funerary 
beliefs. Selements excavated i 1he Delta also show a marked change, lightweight 
smuetues Of timber and mating giving way 1o mudtrick arehiteeture (van den Brink 
980). 1n Upper Egypt the appearance of mudrick architecture__in both domestic and 
funerary contexts seems to be connected with the rkse of dlites, and it may indicate a 
similar process in Lower Egypt at the beginning of Naqada HII (Wilkinson 1996 95) 


Early dati E 30 


Several prestige anefacts, notably carved stone paletes, have been found at sites in the 
noireastem Delta (Leclant 1952; Fischer 1958, 1963: Kmeper 1989), apparently 
confirming the existence of loeal Gites in the area during the last phase of the Predyastie 
period. All the evidence seems to point towards the incorporstioa of the Delta into he 
socioeconomic pattem charncterisic of Predynastic Upper Egypt local ites enjoying 
differential access to resources, expressing hel status in the conspieuous consumption of 
prestige materials and in the wealth of their burials, In short, by the begioning of he 
Kaqada II! period, Upper and Lover Egypt shared the same material culture, and were 
increasingly characterised by the same social structure (von der Way 1993:96): The stage 
was set for the process of seule formation to begin in cares 


EARLY CENTRES OF KINGSHIP 


The heartland of he technological, social, ideological, economic and political changes 
that led Egypt to statehood was the southem part of the Nile valley. Here, in the narrow 
oodplain of Upper Egypt, the conditions seen to have bez most favourable for the rise 
of early giles (Bard 197). Basin irigıtion could be practised with tire difficulty, the 
fenile alluvial land producing moe food han was necessary for mere subsistence, A a 
number of key locations, wadls gave access to the mineral resources of the western and 
Caste desers, providing communities with the prestige materials required by their 
1eaders for conspieuous consumption. Control of trade routes, whether overland or by 
wive, gave certal sites a further advantage, allowing local dlites to dominate economic 
exehange over a wider area than their iemmediate hinterlands. The combined effect of 
hese factors was 1o give rise to a number of flourishing Predynastic coqamuniies ruled 
by highly developed dlites displaying some of he features later associated with kingship 
(Kaiser and Dreyer IRZ242-5 Four sites in particular seem 1o have played a mtjor 
part in the concentration of political and economic power that was 1o charneterise the 
formation of the Egyptian stale (Figure 21. 

"The site of Naqada has given iis name to the Predyastic material culture of Upper 
Egypt as a whole, and to he chronological divisions which moderns archaeologists 
impose on the development of that culture. On the west bank of the Nile, opposkte the 
entrance 1o the Wadî Hammamat that gives access to the minersl-ich Red Sea Hills, & 
large setlement gew up in early Predyastic times, accompanied by extensive 
cemeteries oa the desert edge (Kemp 18936, fig. 9). Since the name for Naqada in 
histori Himes wras Nubt, ‘city of gold, it is poksible that the site's early prospertly was 
founded on this precious commodity, available st various sles in the eastern desert and 
no doubt traded throughout Predynastic Egypt (Trigger er al. 1983.39), Ceraînly, by the 
Naga Il period, the local ruling class had grown wealthy and differentiated themsehes 
increasingly from the general population, This is most noticeable in he mortuary sphete, 
dle burials beng located in a separate cemetery (whieh, however, continued to inelude 
les wealthy intenments as well) Cemetery T, as i is known, contained a number of large 
bricklined tombs, furnished Wt sabundanî grave goods, mony of hem in prestige 
muterils (Kemp 1973:3843, 1980935-7, esp. 36, fg. 9). Judging from the size and 
splendour of their burials, the Predyastic rulers of Naqada seem 1o have controled » 
errtory of some size, perhaps amounting to a ‘Kingdon’. The importance of Naqada and 


ius ruling family in the process of state formation is highlighted by the construction of 
mmo royal tombs to the south of ihe Predlynastie necropolis at the very beginning of the 
First Dynasty (Kenmp 1967:24-5, footnote). One of these belonged to Queen Neithchotep 
(e Morgan 1801), probably the wile of Narmmer, who may havê been a descendant of the 
Predynastie rulers of Naqada. Moreover, the local god of Naqada, Seth, was closely 
associated with the kingship ia Early Dynantie times, being one of the two deities 
embodied in he person of the King. Hence, a tille bome 


HEZ 


2 


2 
4 2 

Figure 2.1 Early centres of kingship. Tombs of lale 
Predynastic nulers: (1) Abydos tomb U-j 
(afer Dreyer 1993:33, fig. 4); (2) Naqada 
tomb TS (after Kemp 1949:36, fig. 9%: (3) 
Hierakonpolis Locality 6 tomb | (afer 
Holtman 1982:44, fig. 1.13); (4) Qustul 


tomb L24 (after Willlams 1986-358, fig. 
170). 


Barly ajmastie Hap 12 


by Fist Dynasty queens was ‘she who secs Horus-and-Seth', whilst he Second Dynasty 
King Peribsen chose to emphasise Seth as his protector deity in preference to Horus. As 
we shall see, Naqada may have played a key role in the political eoasalidation of Upper 
Ef that peeceded the unifieavian OF the whole county (Kemnp 1089-35). 

A large Predynastic settlement, extensive cemeteries and a concentration of élite 
‘burials in one cemetery are also features of another Upper Egyptian sie, Hierakonpolis 
(B.Adams 1987, 1905, 1996; Hoflnan 1982; Kemp 1989:3741, esp. 40, û. 11). The 
arva covered by the Predynastie tow exceeds any other contemporary setilement in 
Egypt, marking Hierkonpolis out ss perhaps the dominant centre in the fourh 
millennium BC (Kemp 1989:4). Like Naqada, Hierakonpolis benefned fiom aceess to 
he mineral rexourees of the caslem desert, via the Wadi Abbad, Close contacls with 
Lower Nubia may have given fhe rulers of Hierakonpolis control of, or at least access to, 
lucrative irade routes connecting Egypt and sub-Saharan Afiica, whilst a broad expanse 
of cultivable lund provided the necessary base for a growing population and an expanding 
sector of nonproductive specialists. As early as Kaqada 1, members of the local élite 
ere buried in a remote spot out in ihe desert, designated Locality 6 (B. Adams 1996) 
Their successors of the Naqada I1 period chose û cemetery closer io the cultivation, and it 
was here hut the famous painted 1omb was discovered During the final phase of he 
Predynastie period, Naqada IIL, the local lle moved its burial ground back to Localiy 6, 
constructing massive roek cut tombs with offering places. Tonbs are not the only sign of 
he important role played by Hierakonpolis in the late Predynastie period. A large 
ceremonial centre excavated on the low desert and dating back 10 fhe early Naqada Ii 
period has been interpreted as a temple, closely resembling shrines depicted on First 
Dynasty seal-impressions (RL Friedman 1996 At the end of Naqada I, the main focus of 
local religious activity was apparently relocated to the walled town of Nekhea, where a 
ıcireular stone revetment and an adjoining peved area represent the earliest temple on he 
tour mound (Quibell and Green 1902: pls LXV, LXXII; Hoffman 1980:1312), i was 
here that Egyp'S first historic kings (°Seoepion” and Karmer) dedicated votive palettes 
and mceheads, 1o honour the local god, Horus of Nekhen. Although Namer was 
probably descended fiom the Predyrastic rulers of This, King ‘Seocpioa' may have been 
ıa member of the ruling family of Hierakoapolis (Trigger, in Trigger et al. 1983:50) 1a 
Common with Seth of Naqada, fhe close identifieution of Horus of Neken with divine 
kingship emphasises the important role played by Hierakonpolis and its rulers ia he 
process of state formation, and i the foemulation of kingship ideology (RFriediman 
194:17), a sole already anested i Ihe decoration of the paieted tomb. 

One of the earliest examples of classe kingship iconography is 3 decorated incense 
bummer from the Naqada III royal cemetery at Qustul in Lower Nubia (Williams 1986: pls 
3 and 38). So many mols are peesented together including he ruler wearing he 
white crown, the god Hous, and a niche building similar 1o early serelis_that he 
cemetery 's excavate argue in favour of a Lower Nubian origin for Eqyptian kingship 
(Williams 1986:163-90, 1987), Whilst earlice Egyptian examples of royal iconography 
(or example, the Abydos vessel and the Hierakonpolis painted tomb) make such 3 theory 
unlikely (W.¥.Adans 1985; Baines 1995104-5, there is no doubt that the rulers buried 
in Qustul Cemetery L hall adopted mueh of the symbolisn of rule developed by their 
Upper Egyptian counterparts. Curl burials are a feature of the Qustul royal cemetery and 
wave also attested a Hicrakonpolis Locality 6 (Hofman 1982:55 6; Williams 186:176) 


Together with the iconographic evidence, this seems to indicate significant cultural 
ıexehange belween these wo late Predyasic Kingdoms oa the Upper Nile. The size and 
wealth of the Qustul royal tombs make it lkely that their owners were powerful rulers, 
perhaps exercising authority over much, if not all, of Lower Nubia. The basis of their 
Seoncmic and poliieal power seems to have been the irade between Egypt and sub> 
Saharan Africa in which the rulers of Qustul would have acted as middlemen. A4 we shall 
see, access lo and control of trade routes were key factors in the process of stale 
formation. 

The fourth centre of early kingship is the site where taut institution is int attested 
iconograghically, Abydos. Cemetery U, he sile of higlstaras burials since Naqada 1, 
continued to be used by the local rulers and heir associutes throughout the Predyoastic 
period, although graves dating to Naqada Il are eather saree, perhaps suggesting that 
highstans tombs were located elsewhere in this period. In ihe final phase of he 
Predynastie, Cemetery U clearly underwent a transformation into a burial ground 
reserved for the rulers of the Thinite region. Whereas in Naqada 1 dilte burials were 
intermingled with siıple sand<cut pits, the Naqada HI tombs are exclusively high status 
(f. Dreyer 19034; Dreyer et al. 1996). This demarcation of a separate élite cemetery, 
paralleled at the other three sites discussed above, is one of ihe key indications oF 
political consolidation and incipient kingship (Baines 19095109). The earliest own levels 
ûî Abydos also date to the Naqada II period (Petrie 1902.22; Kemp 1977-189: Wilkinsoa 
1993a: 218-19), demonstruting lak between the concentration of political power snd 
he beginnings of urbanism. If some of the yotive objects fron three deposits are 10 be 
dated 10 the late Predynantic and Early Dynastic periods, as seems plausible, then 
“Abydos, ike Hierakonpolis, appears to have been the site of an early shrine (for further 
examples, at less prestigious sis, see Chapter 8). Unlike the situation at Kaqada and 
Hierakonpolis, there is no evidence at Abydos for significant Prelynastic settlement. The 
regional capital and presumably the residence of the rulers buried at Abydos_was 
This, an ancient site which has not been located but wich probably lies beneath he 
modem city of Giga. As at Naqada and Hierakonpolis, we would expect evidence of 
‘substantial late Predynastic coastructioa st Tis as wel. la the absence of such evidence, 
it is impossible to compare the three Upper Egyptian ies direclly, but he mortuary 
second certainly indicates the primacy OF ThilAbydos Iowards the very end of the 
Predlynastic period. The Naqada II tombs in Cemetery U are large, brickcline structures, 
several of them with muliple chambers (Dreyer 19934: 32-6, pls 4.8 and 5). The mosî 
lavish burial, tomb Uj (c 3150 BC, comprises eign chambers, some of thera linked by 
small slits which probbly symbolise doorways. The tomb as a whole may repeesent the 
foyal palace in microeosn (Dreyer 192b: 295), in which case it would be the earliest 
example of palace symbolism in Early Dynastic mortuary architecture (Baines 1995:1070) 
“The provisian of an arena for the ritual of kingship, modelled on the courts and buildings 
of he royal residence, eas a key component of the royal mortuary complex in the first 
‘three dynasties. Tomb U-j may allow us 1o trace this aspect of royal mortuary architecture 
and ideology back into the Kaqada II1 period, once again emphasising the Predynustie 
origins of Egyptian kingship. One of the objecls recovered fiom tonsb Uj was an ivory 
Meqa-seepire ta the form of a shepherd's crook (Dreyer 19934: pl. 7a, 1993: 11). This 
remined one of the essential elements of soyal regalia throughout Egyptian history, and 
ils presence among the grave goods of tomb Uj leaves no doubt as ta he royal status of 


Early dme Hyp 34 


he occupant. Moreover, the tomb is by far the largest of its date anywhere ia EYI, 
suggesting the strong possibly that its ovmer exereised rule or at least hegemony Ver 
uch if not all, of the Nile valley. The extent of his influence is highlighted by the other 
ave goods vith whic tomb Uj was furnished 


TRADE, OWNERSHIP AND POWER 


Perhaps the most striking categories of object from Abydos tomb Uj are those whieh 
illustrate the economic and administrative apparatus at the ruler's command (Figure 22). 
Dozens of insetibed bone labels constiaune he earliest corpus of writing yer found i 
FEaypt (Dreyer 992b: pls 6.1-4, 1993a: pl. 7-j) The shon inscriptions, compeising no 
more than o or three dividual signs, refer 10 places wich presumably supplied he 
uler's court wih commodities. The labels themselves would originally have been 
alached to hese consignments, recording their quantity and provenance. Localities 
mentioned on the labels include Delta towns such as Bubasis (Dreyer 1992b: 297, pl 
64, 1903a: pl 7:). Either he Thinite king already ruled Lower Egypt or he possessed 
sufficient stanus to command supplies fron he Delta. There is no doubt that his court 
Engaged in large-scale rade with the Near East: the tomb contained over 400 imported 
vessels ffon Syrla-Palestine (Haruung, in Dreyer 19934: 49-56, pl. 9) (Note that he 
word ‘Irade" as used hete refers to the exchange of commodities without the profit motive 
that characterises trade in the modern worl) Many types are previously unatested in 
Egypt, and petrographic analyses have led to he conclusion that somme of he vessels may 
have come from as fir afield as northern larsel and the Labanoa (van den Brink. personal 
communication). The clased forms indicate that the pots were used as covtainers Or 
1iquids; fhe residues which have survived inside some vessels suggest wine as one of the 
principal commodities (Dreyer 1992: 297), We do not Know what Egyptian products 
passed in the other direction, but the sheer number of pots illustrates the scale of trade 
Conducted between Upper Egypt and the Near East in the late Predynastic period. 


Long-distance trade in high-status goods had been practised by Egypuians from carly 
Predynasie dimes. Lapis lazuli fromm the mountains of Bodakhshan (present-day 
Afghanistan) is atested in graves of the Naqada 1 period (Matanar 3005: Brunton 1944: 
pl LXXJ: imported vessels Rom SyriacPalestine and even Mesopotamia turn up 
sporadically in burials from this time onwards (Kantor 165.6-14, gures 3_4), whilst 
Nubian hand-made bowls are a rare, but characteristic, ype of pottery in graves of early 
Naqada IL As the éiites of Upper Egypt grew increasingly powerful during the second 
half of he fourth millennium BC, they came to require peeslige goods to demonsteate and 
reinforce heie exalted social stalus. A particular Iype of Palestinian vessel __4 jar with 
wavy ledge handles was evidently s0 sought after that it inspired Egyptian potters 1o 
copy it, giving rise to a whole class of Naqada I1 Egyptian potty known as wavy- 
handled jars (Bourriau 1981:1303; Nerdier 1984-21217) Dentand for genuine imports 


igure 2.2 Trade, ovmership and power. Objects 
from Abydos tomb U-j: (1) Bone labels 
(enlarged), originally attached to 
commodities, The short inseriptions record 
the quantity or provenance of the goods: 
(a) the number eight; (h) Bubastis (ancient 
Egypt Bîst) in the north-eastem Delta 
(aller Dreyer 1993: pl. 7.0, i). (2) Some of 
the hundreds of imported vessels found in 
the tomb; petrographic analysis suggests 


Eacly dni EM 36 


many of the vessels were manufactured in 
northerm Israel, and may have contained 
wine (author's photograph). 


gew, and with it the intensity of foreign trade practised by middlemen such as the 
redynastie inhabitants of Minshar Abu Omar, The frequency of Palestinian pottery in 
he Prelynastic graves at Minshat indicates that the community maitained close contacts 
"wilh its neighbours 1o the northeast (Krneper and Wildung 1985-97-8). At the other end 
of he Nile valley, the Lower Nubian rulers buried at Qustul undoubtedly derived their 
power and influence fro their bility to contol Egyptian access 1o goods om sub- 
Saharan Afica, such as ebony, Ivory snd ostrich eggs. Qustul seems to have bern at the 
ub of a extensive longdisunce tade network, sisce some of the royal tombs were 
fumished with imported vessels from both Upper Egypt and SyriacPalestine (Williams 
1986: pls 17-24 and pl. 25, respectively) With communities (und their rulers) on the 
oniiers of Egypt growing rich and powerful froan trade, i is perhaps not surprising that 
he jealous eyes of the mest influental Upper Egyptian rulers ould have turned to trade 
owes. As we shall see, gaining direct access 1o imponed commodities sees to have 
been one ofthe main motives behind the process of poliical unitication. 

The mast of foreign vessels from Abydos tomb U-j illustrutes the commodities 
imported by Egypt from the Near East, but the cher side Of the rraling relationship is 
less well attested. Gold may have been an important export for Predymastie Egypt: it Was 
highly valued throughout The ancient world and, as we have seen, the early importance of 
at least one major Upper Egyptian centre, Naqada, may have been based upon 
exploitation of this precious metal. Egypt may also have exported cereal crops, ils 
ferility and agricultural potential the envy of other, less fortunate lands. Sueh exports 
would be dificult, if not iespossible, to detect in the archaeological record, but few 
indications of trade with Egypt have been found in the Near East Pottery storage vessels 
(or sherds fiom vessels), amade in Egypt and incised befoce firing with marks of the royal 
“wensury, have tumed up thıughout northern Sinai and southern Palestine, at sites such a6 
el-Beda, Rafal, Tell Arad and Nahal Tilah (van den Brink. in preparation) Some of 
ese sites may have been Egyptian ‘colonies’, established to exploit local economic 
resources directly (Brandl 1992: Porat 1992), Gers, nousbly Tell Acad, are known to 
have been flourishing centres of he indigenous late Chaleollthiefarly Bronze Age 
Palestinian civilisatioa (Amira 1978), aad ıt comes as lirle surprise that hey maintained 
active trade inks with Egypt 

‘The identification of commodity consignmeats—both those destined foc foreign 
markets and hose traded within Egypt by means of pot marks illustrates the growing 
Obsession of the Upper Egyptian rulers with ownership, accounting and the detailed 
management of economic resources. The very development of Egyptian wring can be 
‘Seen 1 this context (Postgane er al, 1995), anl the bone labels fromm tomb Uj emphasise 
he link between economic activity (especially long-distance trade) and bureaucratic 
sophistication. Since thelr contol of resources gave the rulers of Predynastie Upper 
Faypt heir political authority, it was clearly of great importance to ensure that accurate 
records were kept of receipts and deliveries, and that property was easily dential. The 
sereka panelled rectangle repeesentîng 3 section Of the facade of the royal palace 
seems 1o hive been chosen as a mark of royal ownership. A seref incised or painted ia 


ink on a vessel denoted that the contents were the produce andlor property of the royal 
court. A fist, a simple serek was enough to convey this message: later, he individual 
“ruler incocporuted his name within the pane! to specify ownership more precisely (Müller 
938:131 ef Kaiser and Dreyer 1982: fig. 14). Serelis incised oe painted on potlery 
vessels for this purpose constitute our earliest corpus of royal names, The distaibution of 
particular soyal names gives an iadicntion, albeit a rough one, of the extent of a king's 
economic influence o¢ political power. Hence, it is possible ia some degree to trace he 
fise of he Egyplian stale. Whereas vessels Bearing the names of some Kings (suc as 
'Ka') are attested rather rarely, Narmer's name has been found incised on vessels hom 
ses roughout Egypt and southern Palestine, emphasising that his rule probably 
extended over he eire Nile valley and beyond. 


THE DYNAMICS OF STATE FORMATION 


As we have seen, the various trends which led to the formation of the Egyptian state were 
gradual processes which began in the early Predyeustie period Increasing social 
ısalilicadon, the developmen and expression of an ideology of rule, the spread of Upper 
Eiytian technology and other culural” atributes throughout he country, the 
concentration of economic and political power in the hunds of a few ruling families, the 
intensification of foceig trade, the invention of writing and the emergence of a lkerate 
bureauersey: these were not sudden developments, although the pace of change seems to 
have aceelerated during the last quarter of he fourth millennium BC. What is clear is that 
hese processes did not affect all segions of the country to the same extent. Local and 
regional factors such as the economic resource base, topography, communications and 
distance Rom the centes of power affected to 4 considerable extent the pice of 
developments at individual sites (Malek 1986-26: Wilkinson 1996e: 80-90). Those 
localities which already enjoyed economic and political influence continued 1o develop 
rapidly, whilst the quieter backwaters (for example, Middle Egypt) participated hardly at 
Jal in the momentous changes sweeping the country. Indeed, i is Ikely that many smaller 
firming cormmuaities wete relatively unaffecied by Egyptian unifieation and the advent 
of a national government, except that they now paid taxes 1o the central treasury rather 
han to local or regional Gites When considering state formation la Egypt, itis ioıportant 
to recognise this patlem of regional variation, and of local variation witli regioas. The 
proccss was not 4 monolithic one, and although its ultimate effects were felt hroughout 
Egypt certain localities played a much greater role in determining the outcome: 

“Alhough he characteristics of carly states are broadiy similar for different regions of 
he ancient world, the factors involved in ste formation are likely to have varied 
according to particular circumstances (Cohen 1978). Different suthors have postulated 
different ‘prime movers’, hat s principal factors, for he emergence of the Egyptian state 
(Band 1904-1-5). These inelade population pressure (Cameiro 1970; Bard and Cameiro 
1989), prompting Upper Egyptian nilers to annex the fertile fields of the Delta to support 
a growing populaton (F.AHassan 19842165 6¥ the influence of irrigation ia he 
concentration of power (W itîogel 1957} trade (Bard 1987); and ideology (Band 1992; ef. 
Kemp 1989:32 and 35). Although ll these factors ace likely 1o have played a part in the 


Early dma Hap 8 


concentration of political and economic power, some ean be rejected decisively a prime 

‘For example, given the carrying capacity of agricultural land in Upper Egypt and the 
probable size of the uncient population, r seems unlikely thar popula pressure wras a 
significant factor in the formation of the Egyptian state (F.A. Hassan 1988.165; Kemp 
989:31; contes Hoffman 1980309). Even though he strip of cultivable land is often 
very namow in Upper EgypL it seems always 1o have been sufficient to support the 
ancient population, None he less, fhe end of he Neolithic subpluvlal and he 
accompanying desiccation of the savannahs probably caused an taux of desert 
pastoralists into the Nile valley in the lte Predynastic period. Such a phenomenon seems 
o be atested at Hierakonpolis (Hoffman et al. 1986), and it may have played a part in he 
Social processes which ed to the formation of the state. The Scorpion macehead is an 
exception amongst early royal iconography which generally makes no reference 10 
ization works N is also unlikely that water management in the Nile valley Was 
organised on a national scale in Early Dynastic times. The evidence fron Iter periods of 
Egyptian history indices That irrigation was not centrally controlled, noc would central 
control have been practicble: basin iigation was the most eflicient way of hammessing 
he foodvraters of the Nile, and this would have been most effectively managed sat he 
local or regional level by communities, perhaps overseen by local govemors. Hence, the 
contol of irrigation on a nation-wide Basis can probably be discounted as 3 major facie 
in Egyptian state formation (Janssen 1978-217, Lamberg-Karlovsky and Sabloff 
1919:120; F.A. Hassan 1988:165 ef. Hofinan 1980315-16) Ji has bees argued that he 
need for ever more coaplex information processing was a Key factor in Mesopotamian 
ısuule formation (Wright and Jonson 1975) la Egypt, oo, here is litle doubt that the 
inereasing centralisation of political and economic authority required sophisticated forms 
of administration ~ notably recordkeeping and the invention of writing (Postgale er al 
1905), However, this seems o be a correlate or effect of state formation rather thn 4 
primmaly cause. 

I is now generally accepted that a combination of factors was responsible in the 
FEayptian case (Lamberg-Karlovsky and Sablofî 1979.207-11, 329 30: FA Hasson 
1988:1646; Wilkinson 1996e: 90), The archaeological and iconographic record 
ıeıplhasises Iwo factors, trade and ideology. In diseussing them, an obvious danger arises: 
because these Iwo factors wete clearly at work in late Predynastic Egypt (more clearly, 
perhaps, han other factors mentioned above), it is all too easy to overstute their fluence 
o the process of state formation as a whole, The emergence of the Egyptian state is best 
understood as having a ‘muiplicity of causes’ (F.A. Hassan 1988:1659. 

Recent excavations at Abydos and in fhe Delta_at sites such as Buto and Minshat 
Abu Omar have highlighted the important part played by foreign trade in the dynamics 
ıo stale foemation (contra Kemp 1989:31) OF course, the increasing denmand Tor prestige 
goods sequirel by trade was a consequence, not a cause, of social inequality (FA Hassan 
988:165). None the less, a strategic location for trade seems to have been the common 
actor in the rise of particular Predynastie centres. Fron Bul and Minshat Abu Omar ia 
he Delta to This, Naqada and Hierakonpolis in Upper Egypt, and Qustul in Lower Nubia: 
ıall seer to have gained impodance and power through access to, or control of, trade 
foues, The vast numbers of imported vessels buried in tansb U-j at Abydos demonstrate 
he importance of foreign commodities to the late Predynastic rulers of Upper Egypt, and 


he aelive part they played in long-distance trade. His probably no coincidence that the 
territory conquered by he kings of Upper Eypt to achieve polkieal unifienion was that 
which gave them direet sees to Near Easter trade routes, via land and sea. The rapid 
demise of the indigenous Lower Nubian A-Group at he beginning of he First Dynasty 
can also be atribuled 1o Egyptien expansionism, as he carly kings sought 1o eliminate 
he middlemen in their trade wilh sul Sahaean Affica. The desire for direct secess 1o 
foreign commodities is amunifested in the phenomenon of ‘core and periphery, anestel 
for other early civilisations (Rowlands f al. 1987; Algaze 1993) 1n the pivcess of 
political and economic consolidation, the Kings of the lale Predynastic period and cacly 
First Dmasty temporarily extended their power beyond the natural bomders of Egypt, 
mounting eaids into Lower Nubia to subdue the local population and establishing outpost 
ıi southem Palestine 1o exploit the local resources directly. The character of he Egyptian 
presence in southern Palestine has been understood only recently, and it underscores the 
emiral importance of trade in the stave formation process. 

"A factor which must have played a par in the unification of Egypt is the ‘generative 
power that works fron the top downwards and fons the centre ourwands” (Kemp 1989:7) 
or, 1o put another way, poliical ambition and the charisma of particular rulers (Service 
1975291; Wilkinsoa 196b: 89). Although Hierakoapolis and 1 rulers appear to have 
been at the heart of the unification process, t vras the royal family of This hut ultimately 
selzed the peize of kingship. The reasons behind this are not clear, but perhaps he 
character of the competing rulers played a part in the final outcome. Once a unified state 
had been forged, Egypes early Kings lost no time in promulguting an ideology of 
kingship which presented the unification of the county as the fulfilment of a peedestined 
order. We cannot hope 1o know if a similar belief ia the divîne ordination of Egyptian 
unity inspired ihe lale Predynastie rulers of Upper Egypt with the missionary zeal 1o 
annex {he north and make Egypian unity a poltieal reality (Lamberg-Karlovsky and 
Sablolt 1979.133; ef. Kemp 198935. However, ideology is a powerful force or 
historical change and, as one lending scholar hus pointed oul, ‘states are. ..built oa he 
urge 1o ule and on visions of oeder (Kemp 19899; cf. Wenke 1991:2834). We must 
now examine the process of conquest and annexation that resulted in EgypUan 
ıunifîeution, and attenıpt to reconstruct the course of events that led o the birth of Egypt 


POLITICAL UNIFICATION: A HYPOTHE: 


The archaeological evidence makes it clear that, by the end of Xaqada 1I (e: 3200 BC), 
he most powerful centres were This, Naqada and Hierakonpalis in Upper Egypt (Kemp 
1989:34, i. 8) The regional traditons of potty mamufecture entiîed in Naqada 1 
Upper Egypt may hint st ihe existence of incipient teritories even carlier (Friedman 
19M4:4-5%: hese ‘social regioas' may have formed he basis for the eter political 
divisions (R. Friedman 1904.569) There is an unbroken sequence of diitelroyal tombs at 
Hierakonpolis fon the Naqada I period 1o the very threshold of he First Dynasty. At 
Naqada, here is a slight hianus between the sequence of Clie tombs in Cemetery T the 
etext of which (T36) dates to early Naqail 1il, even though a selatively poor grave (T33) 
din he same cemetery dates 10 the threshold Of the First Dynasty (Hendrick 1993; ef. 


Bucy date Em 40 


Buumgartel 1970: LXIX) and the royal tombs of the carly First Dynasty. This break is 
probably significant, and suggests that Naqada was eclipsed by one of t6 neighbouring 
errtories {either Abydos to the north or Hierakoapolis to the south) during she final 
stages of the stute formation process. At Abydos, the Fist Dynasty royal ioenbs on the 
Umm el-Qaab are the direct successors of the Predynastic dile burials ia Cemetery U 
which span the period between late Naqada 1 snd the en of the Predlynastic period, With 
wan apparent, unexplained gap during the middle of Naqada II. Moreover, the size of tomb 
„j may indicate that its oceupant already ruled much of Egypt as early as Naqada Ill (e 
3150 BC), The process of political unifiention seems 10 have been well under way, if not 
alseady complete, by the ime tomb Uj was constructed. Indeed, he wide geographic 
distribution of sinilar types of pottery by the end of Naqada II may suggest that a degree 
of politieal unity already existed several generations before tomb U-j was built (R. 
Friedman 194:435) The royal cemetery at Qustul atests the shorwlived existence of & 
powerful Lower Nubian pollty during he Naqada Ill period. The largest geve in 
Cemetery L_which contained the decorated incense bumer mentioned earlier is 
roughly comenporury with Abydos tomb U-j. Roekcur inscriptions in The vicinity of the 
Second Cataract seem 1o record punitive expalitions mounted by Egyptian rulers against 
Lower Nubia, ding 1o the extirpation of ihe indigenous A-Group and the demise of the 
Qustul Kingdom by the begianing of the First Dynasty. Hence, the evidence of tombs 
provides some clues bout the dominant players in the inal centuries of state formation. 
eonography and ideology may also be of some help. The later importance of Horus 
and Seth in the doctrine of divine kingship points to the signiîcance of Hirakonpolis and 
Naqada in the process of unification (Kep 1989:37). The hwo crowns associated with 
the king from the very beglaning of the Fit Dynasty may have ocigiaated st these two 
places. The red erown is shown in relief on a shend fon a large black-toppedl red ware 
Vessel from Naqada (Payne 1993:94, fig. 34.774; Baines 1995-140, fg. 1) The vessel 
probably dates to lute Kaqala 1 (c. 3600 BC), making this by far the earliest occurrence 
OF he red crown and suggesting that this item of royal regalio may have originated at 
Naqada, perhaps as the headgear worm by the local ruler. The wakte crown is first atested 
won two royal aiefacts form the late Predynastic period, the carved ivory handle of a int 
knife (Wiliams and Logan 1987, esp. 273, fig. 1) and the decorated incense bumer from 
Qustul Cemetery L. The Knife kindle is unprovenanced but is likely 1o have come fon 
somewhere in Upper Egypt. Given he evidence for cultural contacts between Qustul and 
Hierakonpolis in Naqada HIL, ir is tempting 1o loente the origins of the white crown at 
Hierakanpolis 1n this ease, the red crown would have symbolised a nother power to the 
Predynastic Kings of Hierakoapolis, just as in the historic period the red crown was 
transfened 1o symbolise Lower Egypt (cf. F.AHassaa 1988-174). The socalled 
monumeats of unification the decormted ceremonial paleues and maceheads 
commissioned by nulees of the late Predynastie period and carly First Dynasty were 
aditionally interpteted as reconls of actual events in the process of state fxcmmalion. The 
Narmer palete, in particular, was thought 1o represent the king's victory over a Lower 
Egyptian ruler. Even recently, ix has been suggested that this lrter ruler may have been 
based at Buto, and that he controlled s.terrtory which may have iacluded Memphis and 
Tarkhan. This line of argument leads to fhe romantic suggestion that Buto was the las 
norlhemenost refuge of a Lower Egyptian dynasty contemporary with the late Predynastic 
Kings of Upper Egypt, giving rise to the later myth shout mmo competing kingdoms (von 


der Way 1993:96) The argument against such hypotheses centres around the purpose and 
interpretation of artefacts like the Namer palette. They may just as easily depict 
symbolic or ritual activities as actual events ia he political consolidurîon of Egypt (Millet 
T80; Faiservis 1991; Baines 1995-117). Literal ieterpretations of the scenes are now 
generally regarded as old-fashioned (Shaw and Nicholson 1995.197), and it is perhaps 
safer o ignore he palettes and mmaccheads as potential hixtorieal sourecs. (Note, howeven, 
hat an historical interpretation of the Kamer palette may be given new weight by the 
tesant discovery of a label of the same king which names ihe event depicted on his 
palette) 

Taking into account all he evidence, it is possible 1o suggest the following 
hypothetical reconstruction of events leading to ihe political unification of Egypt. As 
carly as Naqada I, powerful centres had developed at This, Noqada and Hicrakoapolis ia 
Upper Egypt, whilst local Gites at other sites exercised varying degrees of economic and 
political cenliol over their respective teitories. During the course of Naqala 1l (c. 3400 
BC), powerful local rulers are attested st Abadiya (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982244, 
Willams 1986173) and Gebelein, but 1t was the three major centres and their ruling 
families that continued 1o dominate the processes associated with state formation. 
Towards he end of Naqada Il, a flourishing poliy arose in Lower Nubia, ruled by Kings 
who shared the emergent iconography of rale with their counterparts in Upper Egypt. At 
some point easly in Naqada Ill, the Predynastie kingdom of Naqada was probably 
incorporated whether by poliical agreement or by military force cannot be 
established into fhe territory of a neighbouring kingdom. The amalgamation of these 
mmo polities would then have preceded the unification of Upper Egypt as a whole 
(EA Hassan IO88:165). The Cairo fragment of the Palermo Stone shows, ia Ihe top 
register, a line of kings wearing the double erown (hand copy by LES Eûwands in the 
Tibrary of the Faculty of Ocienal Studies, Cambridge Unnveity ef. Trigger ef al 
1983:4 and 70). If the red and white erowns originated at Naqada and Hierskonpolis 
respectively, then these figures—often interpreted as kings of a united Egypt before he 
beginning of the Filet Dyeustymay sepresent rulers of an Upper Egyptian polity 
comprising the territories of Hicrakonpolis and Naqaila. Furthermore, fhe adoption of the 
local god of Hierakonpolis, Horus of Nekhen, as the supreme deity of kingship, and the 
special atetion paid to the temple of Hous by easly Kings, suggests that it was the rulers 
O Hierakonpolis niho made the first move in the game of powerplay that was ultimately 
o lead to the unification of Egypt. The annexatioa of Naqada would explain the gap is 
he sequence Of ite burials at he site at the en of Naqada Ill, a period which is marked 
at Hierakoapolis by the large tombs at Locality 6. Alternatively, Kaqada may have been 
eclipsed by is northers rival: despite the undoubted importance of Hierakonpolis, the 
unparalleled size of Abydos tomb U (slightly earlier in date than the dite tombs at 
Hierakonpolis Locality 6) suggests thut the Kingdom of This was already dominant by 
ıcarly Naqada HI, at least in the northern purt of the Nile valley, Perhaps the ruler of This 
also exercised hegemony over Lower Egypt by this time, giving him access to The foreign 
rade which is s0 dramatically atestal ia the imporled vessels buried in his tomb. 
Nevertheless, i is stil possible that several nulers, each with his ow regional power: 
base, continued to co-exist and 10 clan soyal titles This may account for a number of he 
royal names attested a1 he end of the Predynastie period. 


Barly amas Hap 42 


It is not clear how politically advanced the Delta was in late Predynastic times. A 
more hierarchical social structure may have developed rapidly in the rake of Upper 
Egyptian cultural influences which permeated Lower Egypt in late Naqada II (yon der 
Way 1993:96). There were probably powerful local Gites at several ses, notably Buto 
and Sal, Some Lower Egypûan rulers may have adopted elements of carly royal 
iSonograghy, particulary the serek, since many of the vessels incised with serek mu 
have a Lower Egyptian provenance (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982: figs 14 and 15) It is quite 
Ikely that the Upper Egyplians who spearheaded ihe drive toward political unification 
had 1o overcome or accommodate local Lower Egyptian rulers, None The less, we cannot 
diseounî the possibiliy that the Delta had been tncocporsted ino a larger polly centred 
ıon This by the Neqada III period (e. 3200 BC). Certainly i eas the rulers of This who 
‘wkimately triumphed in the contest for political power an claimed the prize of kingship 
over the whole country, even though Hierakonpolis seems to have remained important 
until the very end of the Predynastic period. Control of Lower Egypt would undoubtedly 
have given the Thinite rulers a major advantage over their southern rivals, 

Given that King ‘Scorpion dedicated his ceremonial macehesd in the temple at 
Hierakanpolis, and that he is not atestel at Abydos, the theory that he belonged 1o the 
soyal house of Hierakonpolis is an atrucive one. If this was the case, here may have 
been wo rival polities govemed fron This and Hierakonpolis up 10 the very threshold of 
e Fit Dynasty. The reverence shown u Hieeakonpolis by the Early Dynastic Kings 
may reflect the site's importance during the inal stges of state formation. The end of 
Seorpion's reign may have marked a docisive turing.point, the momeat at whic the 
king of This assumed an uncoatested position as sovereign of all Egypt. During the peak 
of activity that accompanied political unifieation, Egyptian contol was extended beyond 
the boners of Egypt proper into Lower Nubia, crushing the local kingdom centred at 
Qustul and leading 10 he rapid disappearance of the indigenous A-Group culture. 
Military raids by early Egyptian rulers are coqamemorated in two roek-cut inscriptions at 
Gebel Sheikh Suleiman ia the Second Catarxct region (Needier 1967: Mumane 1987) 
Egyptian ‘colony sites" also seem to have been established in southem Palestine, 
suggesting a degree of polities control, or at least inflvence, in the region. The final 
stages Of state formation may have been accomplished quite quickly, within wo or three 
generations, and Narmer may, afer all, have been the firt King to exercise authority 
throughout the country unchallenged. He sens to have been regarded by at least Iwo of 
his successocs as something of a founder figure (Shaw and Nichola 1995-18). 1t 
remains impossible to define the moment at which a single king ruled Egypt for the first 
ime. Fron the evidence, this must have secured at some point between he lifetime of 
he ower Of Abydos tomb Uj (e. 3150 BC) and the reign of Narmer (c. 3000 BC) (ef. 
Malek 1986:26). Many scholurs favour an earlier rather thu a later dale or politieal 
ıwnilîention, but the evidence is by no meus unanimous. 

The actual means by whiel the rulers of This ulimaiely gained control over the whole 
country is not known. Annexation of neighbouring termiories must have involved 
negotiation and accommodation at the very least, His not unlikely that more forceful 
tactics were required, and the possibility of military actioa cannot be ruled out, despite 
he diffieukies tnvolsed in interpreting monuments like the Narmer Palete. The ‘Libyan 
Palette’ depicts anacks on a nunber of fortitîed cities (Peuie 1953: pl. G; Kemp 1989-50, 
fig. 16; Spencer 1993:53, ig. 33), but again the symbolism of the decoration may not be 


ısraighnforward However the campaigns of Khasekhem against northem, perhaps Lower 
Egyptian, rebels at the end of the Second Dynasty may provide a ler purallel for the sort 
of action that was required to subjugate he Della. 


KINGS BEFORE THE FIRST DYNASTY 


As we have seen, there is convincing evidence for the emergence of at least three Upper 
FEaypiian polities by the Naqada Il period (c. 1500 BC). The sites of This (with ils 
cemetery at Abydos), Naqada and Hierakoapolis appear 1o have stood at the centres of 
powerful territories, cach ruled by an hereditary dlke exereising authority oa a regional 
basis, The rulers of the three territoeies__ plus an individual buried at Gebclen, ulho may 
have controlled 4 smaller area used recognisably royal iconography to express the 
ideological basis of their power, and may justifiably be called ‘kings’. However, the 
sespective owners of the Abylos vessel, the tombs in Naqada Cemetery T, the 
Hierakonpolis painted tomb and the Gebelein paints cloth are anoayrmous, Whilst their 
status is clear, they are qule literally prehistoric, having lef ao written evidence. I has 
been proposed that hese kings exercising only regional authority might be grouped 
togelher as "Dynasty 00 (van den Brink 19823: vî and n. 1} recognising their royal stahus 
bul emphasising their place in prehistory, The term is perhaps rather contrived, and has 
not won zener acceptance. None the lest, the place of these te Predynastic anonymous 
Rulers st the head of he later dynastic tradition should be acknowledged. 

History begins with the advent of writen records, in Egypt's case the bone labels fromm 
Abydos tomb Uj, Despite the number of inscribed labels froan the tomb, the name of he 
owner himself is not certain. Several pottery vessels from U] were leserîbed in ink wilh 
he figure of a scorpion (Dreyer 102b pl. 4), and this has been interpreted as the 
owner's name, hot 1 be confused with the later King ‘Scorpion’ who commissioned the 
ceremonial tmicehead found at Hierakonpolis (Dreyer 19928: 297 and n. 6, 19934: 35 and 
ın. 4) Other vessels Irom tomb Uj bear short ink iaserîptions consisting of a combination 
of two signs (Dreyer 19058: 53, fig. 4-4). Some of the inscriptions have one sign i 
common, laterpreted by the excavate as a siylised tree, perhaps Indicating ‘estate’ Jt has 
been suggested that he accompanying sign in each case is a royal name, giving The sense 
‘esate of King X" (Dreyer 192b: 297, 19034: 35, 199b; 52 and 54). This hypothesis is 
based upon later parallels which may not be appropriate to the Naqada II1 perio, and the 
idenlilîeation of 3 large number of nev royal names on vessels fron a single tomb may 
be questioned. However, many scholars accept the hypothesis, even if the existence of 
lle Predynastic Kings called ‘Fish and ‘Rel Sea shell” seems sormewhat unlikely. 


‘Dınasty 0' 
"Subsequent kings of he Thinite royal fumily were iatermed in the same ancestral burial 
ground, 1hose rulers prior to Djer being buried in the section known to modern scholars 16 
Cemetery B. The name of at least one pee-Fist Dynasty king is know, whilst 
inscriptions on vessels and oa rocks in the easterm and western deserts atest he existence 
of further named kings before the reign of Narmer (Figure 23). Other inscriptions which 
may o¢ may not be kings” ames have also comme into the discussion. I is these rulers that 


Early dynastic EN 44 


collectively constitute ‘Dynasty O. The tern has caused some confusion, and it is rather 
unhelpful as the word ‘Dynasty’ suggests a single ruling line, moreover one whieh 
exercised control over the whole of Egypt. The various names undoubtedly represent 
ules of various poliies from different regions of the country, and it is practically 
impossible to establish whieh king was the fist to rule over the whole of Egypt. However 
misleading it may be, the terma ‘Dynasty O° has nevertheless come ioto general use and is 
unlikely to be discarded, A preferable and mece neutral term might be “late Predynastie 


0 ا‎ 0 
i 


Figure 2.3 Kings before the First Dynasty. Royal 
names of four late Predynastic rulers, 
ineised on pottery vessels to indicate royal 
omerhip of the contents: (1) serekh of 
‘Scorpion’ (after Kaiser and Dreyer 
1982-263, fig. 1434); (2) sere of ‘Ka’ 
(after Kaiser and Dreyer 1982.263, f 
14.23); (3) serek of unidentified King A 
(after van den Brink 1996: pl. 30.4; (4) 
serekh of unidentified King B (after 
Wilkinson 195:206, fig. Lb). Names not 
to same scale 


Several tall storage vessels fromm Tura and el-Beda (at the westem end of the north Sinai 
coastal route) are ineised with the motif of a seet surmcuated by two falcons (hunker 
1912247, fig. S75; CIdat 1914; van den Brink 1996: table 1 nos 5 6, pl. 254). Some 
scholars have suggested hat this represents the name of a particular late Predyastie 
fale, perhaps based in Lower Egypt (von der Way 193:101). lı could equally be a mark 
designating royal ovmership without specifying the nuler ia question. 

The more famous of the tuo rocket inseriptioas at Gebel Sheikh Suleiman ia Lower 
Nubia shows an carly serek presiding over a scene which apparently seconds a punitive 
Egyptian raid isto the Second Cataract region al the end of the Predlynustie period. Once 
serronecusly dated o the reign of Diet, he inscription has now been shown conclusively 
1 date o the period of state formation (Mumane I987, cf. Shaw and Nicholson 1995:86) 
The serek is empty and therefore anoaymous, but we may hazard a guess that the ruler 
who ordered the inscription to be cut was an Upper Egyptian king, pechaps based at 
Hierakonpolis, The Gebel Sheikh Suleiman inseription proves that Egyptian military 
involvement in Lower Nubia probably aimed at maintaining Egyptian access 1o sub- 
Saharan wade routes began before the start of the Fist Dynasly. The process of 
Egyptian expansionism which led 10 the collapse of the Quswl kingdom and the 
disappearance of the indigenous A-Group culture may therefore have lasted several 
generations (ef Willams 1986:1710. 

'Alhough the rulers buried at Qustul in Cemetery L adopted royal iconography, they 
do not seem to have recorded their names in recognisable form. An incised inseripion on 
ıa potery vessel fron lomb L2 has been interprvted by the excavator as the name of ah 
otherwise umatested Lower Nubian king, “Pe-Hor (Williams 186:149). However, once 
again, the inscription may not be a mme at all, but rather a general mark of royal 
omerhip. 

Tuo pottery vessels from the Early Dynastic cemetery at Tura (Junker 191247, fig. 
573-4; van den Brink 1996: table | nos 78, pl. 2Sb and d) are inseribed with a serebh 
which has been read as "Ny -Hor (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982264-8) but whieh may simply 
be a cursive rendering of the name of Narmer (Fscher 1963:44-7), since abbceviated 
writings of this king's name are common {cf Kaiser and Dreyer I982: fig. 1438). The 
same may be tue of the serekl from Tarhan (Perie 1914: pls VI and XX; van den 
Brak 1996: table 1 no. O, pl. 26), read by some scholars as *Hat-Hor (Kaiser and 
Dreyer 1982) However, ia bolh cases, the vessels themselves suggest a date somewhat 
searlier than the reign of Narmer (ran den Brink 1906), and the possibility that they second 
he names of earlier rulers cannot be exeluded The name writen in ink on a vessel fromm 
toh 412 ar Tarkhan (Pewie er al. 1913: pl. XXXLT1) is unlikely 1 be royal (contra voa 
der Way 1903:1001), as it is not writen within a serek. More probably he tomb ovrner 
was a member ofthe local oc regional dite. 


The omer of Abydos 1omth BAVI? 


Many sherds and complete vessels fron torab B1/2 and the adjacent pit BO at Abydos are 
înseribed wilh a device consisting of a fılcoa perching on a moul-si, This hus been 
ead as the name of a King and the presumed owner f the tomb, *I-Hor (Kaiser and 
Dreyer 1982-212; ef. Petrie 1902:4). There are problems with sueh an iaterpretalioa 
(Wilkinson 1993; O'Bıiea 1996:1312), not lenst the fact that the “name” is never found 


By aie Ba 6 


in a serekh, despite this device alıeady having bezn in use for royal names prior to the 
ıcansiruetion of tomb BO/1/2 (von der Way 1993-99, seeks 1o counteract this argument by 
citing the pot mark from Qustul Cemetery L discussed above). None the less, he 
existence of a King *I10-Hor has gained wide acceptance (for example, van den Brink 
1996). Whilst it is possible that the lomb belonged to a contemporary of Narer's 
(Wîlkinson 19936}, the recent re.exeavation of chambers BÎ and BZ and ihe discovery of 
wan adjoining pit BO (Dreyer et al 1996) make it more likely that the whole complex 
belongs in he sequence of royal burials stretching back from the Fst Dynasty tonmbs in 
Abydos Cemetery B 1o their Predynastic forerunners in the adjscent Cemetery U. 
Moceover, the twin chambers closely resenble the tombs of Kings Ka and Narmer, and 
he locatioa of BOII'2_if not the pottery alo suggests that the owner of the complex 
should be placed immediately before Kar in the order of secession (Hendricks, 
personal communication, contra Kaiser 1990.289, fig. 1, who seems to place ly-Hor 
fher earlier, 1o account for the lack of a sere). 


King 4 


In contrast with some or all of the shove cases, wo royal names from the late Predynastic 
period almost certainly refer to particular Kings, Because neither can be read as yet, they 
lîre designated here as King A and King B. The first ie attested on a vessel hou he 
eastern Dela. The inscription consists of a serek, surmounted by a falcon, with three hr 
ssignwmaces in is upper part (Fischer 1963:44, fig. 1, pl VLa and e: van den Brink 1996: 
pl. 304). Alhough the signs may be a wing of a royal name, it should be noted that 
haces and serekîs cceur together on several other vessels dating 1o the threshold of the 
First Dynasty (van den Brink 1996: pls 26, 28, 30.b-e). Hence, fhe three maces on the 
eastern Dela Jar may simply represent general symbols of royal authoriy, and he 
inscription as a whole could be ‘an extended version of an anonymous serl 
(Hendricks, personal communication). Two similar serels are amestel on vessels fon 
Tur (luaker 191246 and 47, fig. 57.1 and 2), though both lack the Horus falcon. 
Moreover, in both cases fhe h signvinaces occur in the lower pat of he fame, 
seplacing lhe more usual vertical strokes by which the palace facade is indicted, and 
ree circles are shown beneath the sere (van den Brlak 1996: table 1 nos 18-19) 
Because of these differences, The Turs serekths may not represent the ruler whose mark 
appears on the jar fron the caster Delta If, oa the other hand, he three inscriptions do 
signify one and the same king, he fet that he is unattested ouhide Lower Egypt mmay be 
significant (van den Brink 1996-147), bur 1 would be dangerous to reconstruct the extent 
ofa rule's authority on the basis of a few pot marks, 


King 


Tuo rockccut inseriptions in the westem desert behind Amant show another royal name 
(Wikinson 19964). The epigraphy of the inscriptions, particularly the rendering of he 
falco stop the serek, confirms that the king in question reigned st the very end of the 
Predynastie period (“Dynasty 0", : 3100 BC). Because of difticulties in deciphering early 
Egyptian seripl, a plausible reading of the name has not yet been proposed. Given the 
ssouherly location of the inscriptions, it is possible that the king was a mennber of he 


soyal family of Hierakoapalis, which seems t0 have maintained control over the 
ssouthemmost part of Upper Egypt until the threshold of ihe First Dynasty. The extent of 
King B's authority cannot be ascertained, but he was clearly in a position to mount 
expeditions into the weste desert. The inscripions highligMt the extent of Egyptian 
interest in the peripheral areas prior to the First Dynasty. The sere of King B may 
ceur again, but without the Hilo, oa a rock-eut insetiption in the caster desert 
(Winkler 19381:10 and 31). The site lies on the ancient Qena to Quseir route 10 he Rel 
Sea coast, in an ares visited regularly by Egyptian expeditions in late Predlynantic and 
Early Dynastic limes. 


‘Scorpion’ andlor ‘Crocodile 


One of he most striking royal monuments from the period immediately preceding the 
First Dyeasty is the Scorpion macehead rom Hierakoapolis. Despite the objection of 
some scholars (for exarmple, Malek. 198629), the scorpion sign almost certainly reeords 
e name of e king, sinee it has been convincingly demonstrated hal he 
rosettelpalmette sign above the scorpion signified the ruler (H.S Sriith 1992.244). 1a 
Yew of the close stylistic similares between the Scompion macchead and he 
monuments of Narmer, the two kings were probably near comtemporaries (Kaiser 
1990.289, fg. 1). However, since no evidence of Scorpion has been found a Abydos 
but note that the fourchambered tomb BSO, devoid of any inscriptions, has been 
suggested as a possible burial place for Scorpion (Dreyer 1990.71)_he may not ft toto 
he Thinite dynastic seqvence at all Instead, he may have belonged to the royal house of 
Hierakonpolis (Tigger er al. 19846), as suggested by the place he chose to delicate his 
ceremonial ammcchead. In this ease, he may have been at least partly coatemporary with 
armer. The serek of ‘Scocpion’ may cceur on a wine jar Rom Minshat Abu Omar 
(Wîldung 1981:37, fig. 33; van den Brink 1996: pl. 28), although this inscription has also 
been read as the name of Aha (Wildung 1981:35) Two serets writen tn tak on pottery 
vessels fom Tarkhan (Pete et al. 1913: pl. LX; Pewie 1914: pl. XL) have been read as 
‘Scorpion (Kaplony 196, 11: 1090), although, in the absence of any further comparable 
inscriptions a definitive resding remalns impossible for the presen. 

A secent hypothesis assigns the Tarhan inscriptions to another proposed king of 
‘Dynasty 0’, the Horus ‘Croeodile' (Dreyer 19924). This reading is bused upoa new 
inffwred photographs of the inscripûons and their comparison with a seal-impressioa 
fiom a third torab at Tarkhan, dated to the reign of Narmer. The sealing, which may have 
belanged io a governor of the Turkan region, shows a series of ervesdiles above coils 
which probably fepresent water. On the basis Of The inscribed vessels henmselves and the 
fom of the sereths, he Horus ‘Croendile” is identified as a usurper or alternuively a 
king reigning concumeatly wih the main Thinite royal fumily, carly in the reiga of ‘Ka 
Following this interpretation, The Minshat Abu Omar serek mentioned above has now 
been attributed to ‘Horus (Croeodile) the Subduer’ (van den Brink 1996-147} The 
pioposed neve reading of the three inscriptions and the existenee of a King ‘Crocodile’ is 
hot universally accepted. By contrast, the Scorpion maechead remains a powerful piece 
SFevidence for the existence ofa late Predynasûc King of this name. 


Early dma Hap 4 


ka 
The horizontal stratigraphy of the royal burlals at Abydos and the ceramic evidence—the 
ype of pottery associated with the early soyal anes - make it fairly certain that Narmmer 
was immediately preceded (as oiler of This, and perhaps a king of all Egypt) by the king 
whose Horus name shows a pair of ams, the hieroglyph later reall as A King ‘Ka’, as he 
is generally known (but note Kaplony 1958), was buried in he double tomb B7, 
ısitauted berween the graves Of his Predynastic forebears in Cemetery UU and the tombs of 
his successons, he Kings of he Fist Dynasty (Petrie I901: pl. LIX). The theory that he 
serelis of ‘Ka" from tomb BT9 refer to the kafiomb) of Narmer [Baumgartel 197531: 

penned by O'Brien 1996:132] would seer to be iovalidated by the ceeurrences of hê 
same serekh at siees other than Abydos) Clay sealings fon tomb B7/9 confi its 
wanribution (Peuie 1901: pl L1 and XIILS0). Ka' is the best atested king before Namen, 
his ame having been found at sites from Tell Ibrahim Avra in the northeastern Delt 
(an den Bein 192b: 53, n. 14) to Abydos in Upper Egypt. Two jars incised with the 
serekl of ‘Ka’ were found in graves at Helwan (Saad 1947-111 and 112, figs 11-12), 

apparently indicating thst ihe city of Memphis_—whiclh the Helan necropolis servek 
was already in existence before the reign of Narmer, This is despite later tradition that 
Mees founded Egypes new capital st the beginning of the First Dynasty. The serelh of 
Ka" also cceur on a cylinder vessel Rom Tarkhan (Petrie er al 1913. pl. LXI) Hete, 
wand in the numerous inscriptions from the King's tomb at Abydos (Petrie 19023, pls 

1, he accompanying signs sefer 1o revenue received by the royal treasury. They 
illusrate the funetioaing of he centralised sconomy before the beginning of the First 
Dynasty, and they confirm that, from caiest times, tax collectioa ras orgnisel 
separately for Upper and Lower Ey 


A NATION 1S BORN 


From the beginning of the First Dynasty, the Nile valley and Delta, from Elephantine to 
he Mediterranean east, was under the control of a single government, presided over by 
ıa king fron the Thinite royal amily. Although the First Dynasty kings chose to be buried 
in heir ancestral royal neeropolis at Abydos, for at least part of tbe year they probably 
resided at and govemed fon s new capital ciy, located surstegically st the Junction of 
Upper and Lower Egypt, ‘the balance OF the two lands’. The foundation of Memphis as 
he national adminisrtive centre really sepcesents the culmination of the unification 
process, The earliest dlite tomb at Noh Saqqara dates to the reign of Aha (€. 2950 BC), 
i barlal actlviry st Helaw _ which served as the capital's seeond cemetery __began al 
least as early as he reign of ‘Ka" (cE Sand 1947-111 and 112, figs 11-12) I was ‘Kal 
successor and Aha's prelecessot, Narmer (probably the historical Menes}, who became 
associated in later tradition with the foundation of Memphis, and he may have been the 
first king to establish his residence in the city. 

Once fhe peize of national unity had been woa, Egypt's carly kings set about 
ıesablishing mechanisens of rule that would maintain and bolster that unity guaeanteeing 
heir owm peivileged position at fhe same time. The ideology of divine kingship, elements 
of which had been developed by Upper Egyplian rulers in Predynasie dimes, was 
promulgated vigorously through iconography, architceture, ritual and soyal activities. The 


King was peesentad as the binding force of national unity and as the champion of Egypt 
and its people against the forecs of chaos, embodied in Egypt's neighbours. Ofieal 
xenophobia, natioaalism and a strong sense of Egypûaa identity were deliberately 
fostered by the early state as part of its propaganda of rule, ln essence, the concept of the 
nation state, so dominant la world politics today, was the imveation of Egyp’s eacly 
ules. The means they employed 10 promote this concept and the character of the state 
hey moulded forma the subjects of Parts 1I and 1I. 


CHAPTER THREE 
HISTORICAL OUTLINE 


THE EARLY DYNASTIC PERIOD: TERMINOLOGY AND 
DEFINITION 


Ancient Egyptian civilisations defined by the use of monumental hietoglyphics and 
he insitution of divine kingship endured over a period of some three milleaniums. 
Wath such a long sireteh of ime to srudy, Eeyprologists have found št necessary 1o divide 
Ecyptian history into broader periods. These tend to follow the known pattern of internal 
poliical developments, corresponding to eras of unified goverment aad the intervening 
periods of political ftsgmenlation. The time-span that concems us here is the first such 
period, standing at ihe beginning of the Egyptian historical sequence, The formative 
phase of Egyplian civilisation is sometimes referred to as he *Arehale” period {Emery 
1961) However, the term ‘archaic’ implies a value judgement based upon hindsight 
Moreover, it seems an unfair label 1o apply to the dynamic und sophisticated carly cuirure 
ofthe Nile valley, and its use is waning amongst Egyplologists who study the period (Or 
example, Spencer 1993). Hence, he mece neutral and descriptive tem, ‘Early Dynastic’, 
is prefered here. 

For convenience, Eeyptologists have adopted the finer division of Fzyptian history 
into dynasties dawn up by the thict-century BC historian, Manetho, Alhough based 
upon the ancient sourecs available to Manetho at the time, in most cases he dynasties ale 
Bot divisions which would have been recognised by the ancient Egyplians themselves. 
The composiion and demarcation of Manetho's dyuasties have been continually 
ımodiied as seholaly understanding of Egyptian history hus improved. 

“The pyramids of he Memphite necropolis have struck Egy plologists, both ancient and 
modem, as the most characteristic, and awesome, ancient Egyptian monuments. The 
construction of the frst pyramid, under King NejerikhetDjoser of the Third Dyas 
has therefore been regarded as a major turning point in Egyptian history. For this reason, 
ihe Third Dynasty is ofien assigned to he Pyramid Age, more usually termed the Ol 
Kingdom (for example, Trigger cr ol 1983; Malek 1986.124; Kemp 1989-14). This view 
of the past whereby the pyramids were seen as the beginning of the first mujor 
Towecing of Egyplian civilisation relegated Manetho's first two dynasties to a dimly 
known and poorly studied position at the beginning of the dynastic age. Dramat 
advances la our understanding of early Egypt have taken place in the last half-century. 
No longer is he formative phase of Egy pian civilisation a halfuunderstood ‘dark age’: 
Important though they are, the soyal mortuary complexes (including the pyramids) a 
longer constitute the sole landmark or index of achievement fron third millennium BC 
EzYPL Our appreeiution of Egyptian culture in a broader sense continues to decpen and, 
was iî does so, he similarities between the Third Dynasty and the preceding period become 
iereasingly appareat. Despite the ianavation of pyramid-tuildlng, Egyptian civilisation 
ofthe Third Dynasîy shares more in commmoa with the First and Second Dynasties than 


with the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth, the age of trve pyramids. For this season, a mumber of 
eect studies have placed the Third Dynasty in the Early Dynastic period, beginning the 
Old Kingdom with the Fourth Dynasty (for example, Quirke and Spencer 1992:33 and 
36 ef Shaw and Nicholson 1995:89). Although a scholarly convenience vith Hile 
ancient relevance, this view seems to accord much better with the evidence for early 
Egyplian civilisation, and is adopted hete. 

Alhough, for our purposes, the end of the Early Dynastic period is fixed at he 
secession of King Snefene_ihe int king of the Fourth Dynasty ihe precise beginning 
ofthe period is and is likely 1o remain, impossible to defîne. As we have seen, we now 
know of several Kings who lived and reigned before the begianing of Manetdho's First 
Dynasty, A new chronological 1em had 10 be found to describe hese rulers, and logic 
diated ‘Dynasty 0. Alhough this is a ther unsatisfactory term on many sccounts, it 
has been widely adopted It is fairly certain that at least some of the rulers assigned 1o 

"Dynasty O" exercised only regional power. Although a few of the kings st he end of the 

sequence and therefore oa ihe threshold of the First Dynasty may have ruled over 
Such or all of EgYP. i is as yet impossible 1o pinpoint fhe exact moment at which he 
county was first unified politically under a single King. For this historical outline, he 
beginning of the First Dynasty, and more speeilically the reign of Name, will be taken 
sas a starting polat 


SOURCES 


The source material for the history of the Early Dynastic period is diverse and ofien 
fragmentary, but with care ft can be picce together to provide a reliable picture of he 
first tree dynasties. Sourees can be divided into wo broad categories, coatempocary 
records and lute accounts, each carrying ts own inherent biases snd problem. An 
understanding of the context in which particular inscriptions were produced is necessary 
before they can be used as historical sources. 


Comemparany records 


Obviously, contemporary records are more reliable as they present firsthand information 
about the activites of EgypEs easly rulers. As we shall see in Chapter 6, coatempocary 
Sources such as year labels ace by no means objective. They recorded only those evens 
whieh the court considered signiîcant and which presented the instiaution of kingship in 
ihe best light. None the less, They can be used, with care, to illuminate the time in whieh 
they were made. The same is tue of royal monuments, comprising ceremonial paletles, 
ımaceheadls, inscribed slabs, stelae and sone architectural elements fro royal buildings 
These present the iconography of carly kingship, but ia dong s0 may yield historical 
information, for example by recording the king's (inevitabte) victory over his enemies in 
ıa military campaign. A number of 1ockcut inseriptions fron the castem and weste 
deserts and he Sinai provide valuable information about the exlent of Early Dynastic 
activity in Egypt's peripheral regions, and the ability of the cour to organise expeditions 
outside the Nile valley. Perhaps the most abundant inseriptions ftom the frst three 
dymasties are the numerous sealcinpressions from tombs and settlements. These ate the 


Barly amant Hyp 52 


mala souree for analysing the structure and functioning of the Early Dynastic 
administration, and the context of particular seal-impressiens may afford important 
historical information, such as the order of succession. Here, wo recent discoveries have 
made a signiticant impact, Excavations in the royal cemetery st Abydos have revealed 
impressions foam the necropolis seals of Den and Qas (Figure 3-1). The focmer list in 
chronological order the kings of the First Dynasty from Narmer 1o Den, with the additioa 
of he queen mother (and probable regent during Den's minority), Memet, Qan's seal 
iss all eight kings of the Fes Dynasty, confirming the onder established by scholars 
fiom other, more fragmentary, sources. Fiaslly, 3 large number of artefacts bearing royal 
inscriptions can be useful in fling in some o the gaps in our historical knowledge. la 
particular, the sone vessels amassed by Nejerikkhet to furnish his Step Pyramid complex 
(Lacau and Lauer 1950) include many examples from earlier reigns, and hese have 
proved invaluable in establishing the imteal history of the Second Dynasty. Moteover, 
inscribed stone vessels provide the only evidence for a few ephemeral sulers. During the 
First Dynasty especialy, large potlery vessels were oflen inscribed with the name of the 
King, sometimes accompanied by a shor inscription detailing the contents 


Later accounts 


Accounts of the first three dynasties written in later periods have clearly been finered 
through a number of generations, and must therefoce be treated vith caution. In general 
he laler fhe account, the more prone it will be to distortion. The various king list of he 
New Kingdom (Redfonl 1986) offer a starting-point foe reeoasructing the Early Dynastic 
order of succession but, with the exception of the Turin Canon, they only record he 
Kings who were viewed as legitimate la he eyes of he New Kingdon pharaohs. The 
“Turin Canon (Gardiner 1959) does seem to have aimed at historical accuracy, and must 
have draw upon temple archives for much of its information, but it remains doubtful 
whether the reign lengths given for kings who lived more than a millennium before the 
document was compiled can be treated as reliable. Even less reliable is the historical 
information gleaned by Herodotus in the ith cenury BC although sone details have 
subsequently been corroborated by archeological excavation ~ and that by Maneno a 
Centurycand-ahalf later, the latter preserved nly fragmentary in the works of later 
writers The accounts Sf Herodotus and Manetho were writen at least twoxand-a-hall 
housand years afer the Early Dynastic events thenselses, A sueh a distance, aceuraey 
cannot be expected. As with all "histocy’, he material presented reflects the concems of 
he chroniclers own period. Manetho’s division of ERYPI'S rulers into dynasties has been 
adopted by Eayptologiss and does seem partially 10 reflect historical circumstances, 
However, he royal names given by Manetho have proved notoriously diftieult 10 equate 
with he names recorded in the Early Dynastic sources themselves; moreover, some of the 
more fantastic details about individual kings appear to sic from he realm of myth and 
cannot be taken as historically accurate. For these reasons, ia the historical outline which 
fellows, details provided by Manetho and Herndotus have been deemed too unreliable foc 
inclusion (contra Emery 1961). The emphasis has been placed upon comtemporary Early 
Dynastic sources, wil one notable addition. The later source whch has been used is not 
wihout is problems, but is generally accepted by scholars to present an acute, if 


partial, view of Early Dynastic history. This is he Palermo Stone and its associated 
fagments which together comprise fhe royal annals. 


3 ¥8 
ES 


و 
ا 
1 


RRR 
lee ا و‎ 1 


0 e 


Figure 3.1 Rulers of the Fit Dynasty: contemporary 
lists Reconstructed impressions fromm 
necropolis seals: (1) the seal of Den (after 
Dreyer 1987:36, fig. 3); (2) the seal of Qaa 
(aer Dreyer ef al. 1996:72, fig. 26). 


The Palermo Stone is the name given to the main fragment of an annals stone which 
records the reigns of the kings of Egypt from before the First Dynasty to he Fihh 
Dynasty (Seiler 1902; Felek 1982). The original one. 3 large basal slab, must have 


lek 1974; O Mar 1979; Barta 
ze from he same stone or a close 
copy is displayed in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo and is known as the Cairo fragment 


Barly dma Hyp 54 


(Gauthier 1914, and see Figure 3.2 Several smaller fragments in Cairo and London fll 
in small gaps (Gauthier 1914; de Cênival 1965), llhough the authenticity o at least one 
of hese fsgments is questionable (O'Mara 1979), There is sll somme debate about the 
age of the Pulermo Stone and the Cairo fragment. The entries on the Palermo Stone end 
in the FiRh Dynasty, and an Old Kingdom date has been proposed for the monument 
However, i is also possible that he stone represents a later copy of an Old Kingdom 
original. Clearly, the later the monument, the greater the potential for inaccuracies, 
copying mistakes and invention. What makes the Palermo Stone and Caieo fragment s0 
important are the registers which record the reigns of Early Dynastic kings. Each seign is 
divided ito compartments, with one conmpartment for each year. Each year is identified 
by one or mote significant events, recorded in very abbreviutel form. Many of these 
eponymous events are concerned wi the festivals and rimuals of kingship, shedding light 
Jon the mature of that institution in the Early Dynastic period but providing very ile 
information for the writing of ‘history’. Indeed, given the pesctiealities of administration, 
it seems very likely that each year of a king's reign would have had to be “named” in 
advance. The events chosen would, therefoce, necessarily have been of a predictable 
nature, such as pre-planned royal visis, recurrent festivals and the dedication of cult 
statues, From the middle of he First Dynasty, he compartments oa the Palermo Stone 
also second the height of he annual Inmdatlon in palms and cubits IF aceurte, these 
fesonds are an invalwable souree for climatic and ecological flucustions over s period of 
some fve-hundred years (Rell 1970). The topmost regisicr of both fragments seconds, in 
more abbreviated form, a line of Kings who ruled before the begining of the First 
Dynasty. It is impossible to say whether this reflects the historical reality of late 
Predynastie EgYpE oc is sinply an articulation of the later tradition of mythical rulers 
before Menes. The fact that some of he kings ate shown wearing the double crown led to 
carly speculation about the possible political unilicaion of Egypt before the begtaning of 
he First Dynasty, speculation which recent excavations have confirmed as hıving some 
fBunduion. Much of the historical value of the annals lies ia their peesumed original 
completeness, and many scholars have attempted seeonsiructions in onder to establish 
bull the Early Dynastic order of succession and the reign lengths of the early kings. None 
of he reconstructions to dale can be treated as anything other than informed guesswork, 
sand al assume that he annals began with he reign of Ahaa supposiion which mayb 
erroneous, in the light of the recent discovery of a year label of Aha's predecessor, 

darmer (Giddy 1996-30) We may have to adnlt that totally coavineing reconstruction 
of the royal annals is not achievable, unless further fragments of the same oF si 
stones come to light. None the less, the iadividual seconds contained in the surviving 
portions can yield significant information about the first three dynasties Just as 
important, they cll us something about the Egyptians’ own sense of history (O'Mara 
1996) 


Figure 3.2 Royal annals. The Cairo fragment (new 
collation from the original) 


THE FIRST DYNASTY 


Ironically, i is the First Dynasty, the remotest sequence of kings in the Early Dynastic 
ıi is the best understood, in terms of the number of rulers and the onder of heir 


ey aie Bw 56 


accuracy of Manetho's First Dynasty. The original identification of Memeith as a king, 

ther than a queen regent (Petrie 1900:5, chart opposite p. 1), caused some confusion, 
leading to Karmer’s exclusion Rom the dynasty abd a focus ûn Ala as the first king: 
There is no doubt that Aha 's reign was marked by important innovations; none the lest, 
first place in he sequence of eight Kings properly belongs 1o Narmer (Lauer 1966,169 
70; Shaw and Nicholson 1995-18 and 8%; coatra Baines 1995131), and the Den and Qaa 
necropolis sealings confirm that his was the belief of subsequent genermtions of 
Egypllans as well. The difficulties in correlating the names recorded in later King lists 
(usually the nı ames) with those attested on the monuments (usually he Horus numes) 
have confused what should be sa relutively straightforward picture. The debute shout he 
ve deity of Menes_ fist king of the First Dynasty aceording to the Abydos list and 
Manetho_has also rmuddied he waters (Emery 1961327). Those scholars who identify 
Menes with Aha posit the existence of an ephemeral King Athotais between Ala and 
Djer (Dreyer 1987:39) in ander to make up the required eight rulers foe the dynasty as a 
whole, although no such ruler is attested on contemporary monuments or inscriptions. 
(The possible royal tommb at Abydos comprising the pit B40 with or without the adjacent 
tomb BSO has been atributed to Athothis' on fhe basis of ts location and design [Dreyer 
1990:6171], although there are no inscriptions to suppor this view, and fhe necropolis 
ısealîag Of Qua would seem to argue against the existence of an esira king between Aba 
and Djer) Despite such difficulaes, something of a coasensus has been reached about the 
conpesition of the First Dynasty, ureatly assisted by new discoveries, especialy in the 
royal cemetery at Abydos. The durution of the First Dynasty cannot be estimated with 
any precision, since accurate historical records are, for the most part, absent Rom this 
early period, Estimates depend 10 a large extent on hypothetical recoastructioas of he 
Palermo Stone and is associated fragments, together with a notional gure of twenty-five 
t0 thirty years for a generatioa. Various scholars have proposed figures ranging ron two 
hundred 1o two-hundredand-forty years foc the eight kings of the First Dynasty (Lauer 
1966.184, especially n. 5), but such guesses are unlikely to be improved upon without 
new, more precise, historical evidence. 


Namer: 


"Some time around 3000 BC the King suhom we kaow as Narmer acceded ta the throne of 
Egypt The contemporary writings of his name usunlly abbreviuted to a single sign, the 
catfish (which had the phonetic value rin later periods) make it her unlikely that 
his name was esd as Narmer'; however. this name is universally used and will no doubt 
remain so until an acceptable alternative reading is proposed. According to Manetho, the 
Fist and Second Dynasty kings originated om Thinis (or This, the capital of the 
Abydos region, thought 10 lie near_or indeed under dhe modem own of Ginga. The 
presence of Fit and late Secoad Dynasty royal tombs at Abydos seems t0 confi 
Manetho's account, since Abydos was the principal necropolis of the Thinite region. 
Whether or not Narine had a royal residence at This, he cleurly felt strong enough ties 1o 
he region and to his Preynastic forebears to maintain the tradition of being buried ia the 
ancient ancestral necropolis. I Narmer is to be associated with the historical andlor 
legendary figure of Menes (Lloyd 1988:10), he may have bec the first King of Egypt 1o 
reside at Memphis. Herodouus recounts how Menes diverted the course of the Nile to 


found his new capital. However, it is noteworthy that, to date, no monument of Namer 
has been found at Saqqara, the lite necropolis serving Memphis. 

One of he most bested and protracted debates in Egyplology has raged over he 
idenilicatien of Menes: Name, Abn, a coaflatioa of he wo, or a mythical figure 
sepeeseating several rulers involved in the peecess of state formation? Dependent upoa 
hls aegumen i also the peoper placement OF Narmer. at the end of so-called "Dyaasty Û 
or at the beginning of the First Dynasty? Although there is perhaps stronger evidence or 
he laner view (and for ihe identification of Menes as Namen), fhe entire debale is 
ıacmually rather anachroaistic, since the dynasties were not invented until some twe-and-a. 
halfthousand years afer Narmner's lifetime. Nor did he Egyptians have he same sense 
of history as ourselves, What is of signitieanee is the position held by Narmer in the eyes 
ofhis immediate succtscors, the Kings of the First Dyaasty. For at least two of them, Den 
and Qna, Nanmer seems to have been regarde as a founder gure, at least in the context 
of the royal burial ground at Abydos. In this context, t may slo be significant thar the 
earliest inscribed stone vessel fron the hoard of thousands buried under the Step Pyramid 
at Saqqara dates from the reign of Narwer (Lacau and Lover 1959:9, pl. 1 no 1). It has 
been suggestal that fhe inscribed ‘heirlooms collected together by Netjeeikhet to furnish 
his bural may have represented an attempt to hamese the authority and legitimacy of he 
King's predecessors (FD. Friedman 1995:10). 

His tempting to inierpeet the significance of Narmer's reiga in the lig of his most 
famous monument, the ceremonial palette fromm the ‘Mais Deposit at Hicrakonpolis 
(Quibell 1808a: pls XII-XII, 1900: pl. XXIX; Petrie 1953: pls 1-K; Kemp 1989:42. fg. 
12), The scenes carved on this object are probably he best known and most iatensively 
studied fom carly Egypt Whilst the symbolise of the scenes is clear_they convey 
Narmer's iriumph and dominion over both Upper and Lower Egypt particularly he 
lamer the oceasion for which they were carved will never be knows. A siraightforvward 
inorical imempeetion of the monument is now generlly considered to be 
unsopistiented and old-fashioned. Instead, it is argued, the palette may commemorite 
ihe ritual re-enactment of an earlier military victory (the ‘Unifieation of the Two Lands 
was an integral consponent of early coronation rivals), of amay belong entirely within the 

Jh and symbol, conveying the omnipotence of the King without alluding 1o 
historical incident. However, a partially preserved year label of Nare, 
found during the recent German excavations on the Umm eLQaab, may offer support for 
she older, historical interpretation of the Naemer palette. The label apparently records the 
same event as the paleue: it shows the catsh of the king's name smiting a bearded 
Capûve, idenritîed by the papyrus plant on his head ss an inhabitant {and leader?) of 
Lower Eaypl. 

"Another important monument of Narmer's reign is the decorated macehead, also from 
he Hierakonpolis ‘Main Deposit. Like he palene, thermcehend has been variously 
interpreled. An earlier generstion of scholars believed # 10 commemorate Narmer's 
wedding 1o a northem princess, However, the (female?) gure in a canying-chair hours 
before the enthroned King may represent a dekey, an given the likely southern origin of 
Queen Nethrhetep there is no cormobocutive evidence that Narmer sealed he political 
unification of Egypt by marying 3 noqhecn heiress. None he less, a Lower Layla 
selling for whatever ceremony is depicted seems lo be confirmed by the depiction of a 
Shrine with a pitched roof, surmounted by a heron: this was the shrine of Djebaut, & 


Early dma Hyp S8 


district of Bulo in the north-western Delta, A complicating factor is the wavy-walled 
enclosure shown beneath this shrine, which has been compared with the ceremonial 
centre recently exeavated at Hierakonpolis (R. Friedman 1996:33), 

Compared to his known predecessors, Narmer is much more wîdely atested in 
archaeological contexts, His ame has bec found on sherds as far afield as Tel Erani 
(Ward 1969216, fg. 3), Tell Arıd [Amiran 1974,1976) and Nahal Tillah in lerael's 
norherm Negev (Levy e1 al. 1995). Similar sherds have been exeavated in the north. 
Casters Nile Deka (ior example, san den Brink 199%: S2. fig. 83: in peeparution), 
suggesting active rade between Egypt and southern Palestine in Kammer's reign. It has 
been suggested that the Nammer Palette records a military campaign against Palestine 
(Yadin 1955; Weill 1961:20), although this ioterpretatioa is disputed (Ward 1969). More 
convincing evidence for direct contact benween Egypûans and Aslates during the rein 
of Narmer is provided by a frugment of inscribed ivory fom Narmer's tomb (B17) at 
Abydos. shows a beanled man of Asuri sppearnce in a stooping posture, perhaps 
paying homage to the Egyptian king (Petrie I901: pl. IVA-5). ln the Deka, a complete 
esel bearing Narmer’s serekh was found in a grave al Minshat Abu Omar (Krneper 
1988: fig. 141) and a sherd incised with a damaged serelh which nay be the name of 
Namer was excavated st But (von der Way 1989.293, fig. 11-7. Further objecls 
ering he name of Narmer have come to light at Zawiyet e-Aryan (Kaplony 
1963,1656, I mn. 252-3, 255, HI pl 120, no. T2I; Dunham 1978.26, pl. XVla). Tura 
(Junker 1912-47, fg. 57.34; Fischer 1963.46, fig. 30-4, 47) and Helwan (Saad 1947.165, 
fig, 13a) in the Mernphine region: Tarkhan, near he nirance to he Fayum (Petrie of al 
1913: pl. LXI; Pete 1914: pls VI, XX, XXXVI; Fischer 1963.44 and 45, ig. 2: 
Kaplony 1964: igs 1061-2, and Abydos (Petrie 1900-5, pl IV.2; 1901: pls 1L3, 4, 6, 7. 
XI, XINL91-3, LIL3S9), Naqada (Spencer 1980:64, pls 47, 52 [Cat 4S4] and 
Hicrakonpolis (Qubcll 1900: pl XV.7-Kaploay 1963, I pl. 5 fg. 5; Garstang 1907: 
pl. LIB. Adams 1995123-4) in Upper Fzypt, Finally, there is a rock-eut inscription 
Somprising the serell of Narmer and second, empty sereki st Site 1S in the Wadi Gash, 
halfway berwez the Nile valley and the Red Sea coast in the eastern desert (Winkler 
1938: 10, pl XLD. Activity in Egypt's desert border regions is auested fron Predynastie 
times, and the alirations of he eastem desert (principally is stone and mineral 
fesourees) clearly encouraged state-sponsored expedituoos fom the beginning of the First 
Dynasty. 


an 


There is lire doubt that Narmer was succeeded by a king ulhose name is rendered as 
Hor-Aha, or more simply as Aha ("the iglter J One of the most impressive monuments 
fiom the eaely First Dynasty was The royal tanı at Naqada (de Morgan 1807), nov sadly 
lost through erosion, Identifed ociginally ss the tomb of Menes, it is now generally 
acknowledged 1o have been the burial place of a senior female member of he First 
Dynasty royal family named Neith-hotcp (see de Morgan 1897-167, figs 550-5; Spencer 
1980:63, pls 46 and S1 [Cats 449, 450]: 1903:61, fig. 41). The oceurence of several 
labels and sesliags of Aha in de tomb probably indicates that the occupant died during 
ihe King's lifetime, and that he oversaw the burial. la this case, Keilvhotep is most 
plausibly dentitîed as the mother of Aha. The location chosen for her tomb may indicate 


her peovineial origins. Naqada is knowm t0 have been a major centre of political and 
economic influence in the Predynastic period, and it is not unlikely that Karmer a 
member of fhe Thinite royal farsily - would have taken as his wife a member (perhaps 
he heirese?) of the ancient Kaqada ruling family, 10 cement an important political 
salliance between hwo of the key centres of Upper Egyptian authority. 

Aha seems 10 have made « decisive choice in fvour of Memphis as the principal 
cene of govemment: the cariest dile mastaba tomb on he escarpment at North 
Saqqars overlooking the site of ancient Memphis dates 1o his reign (Emery 1930), and 
belanged to a senior figure in the national administrtion, perhaps a brother or other male 
relstive of he King's. Aha himself maiained the radition of his forebears, snd was 
buried in the ancestral necropolis at Abydos (Petrie 1901). One of the accompanying 
subsidiary burials yielded objects bearing the name Benerib (Petie 1901: pls IL 

IA.13; Spencer 1993:79, ig, 57)—linerally ‘sweet of hearı'—and this may have been 
he name of Aha's wife. The design of the King's mermuary complex shows impodant 
new fetures; taken logether wit the Naqada and North Saqqars tombs, it marks out 
Ra's reign ss a period of architectural ianovarion and sophisication. Crafrmunship, too, 
seems to have fourished under Aha. A few inscribed objects have survived to attest he 
skills which the king could command: two copper axe-head: a fragment of an ivory box 
bearing the king's name and that of Benerib (Emery 1961:53, fg. 13; Spencer 1993:79, 
fig. STI: a Fagment of a large vessel of glazed composltion (fuience), with he king's 
serek inlaid in a darker glaze (Petrie 1903:23, pls IV, V.32; Spencer 1903: 73}; and two 
immaculately iaseribed viaite marbles (Kaplony 1965:6 and 7, ig. 4) 

Alhough Aha's name has been found at several sits-—Abu Rawash (Klasens 
1959:51, fig. &, pl XXVILÎ), Zaviyet el-Aryan (Kaplony 1963, 1 66, IE n. 1592. 
Dunham 1978:1, figs 1, 1a), Saqqaea {Emery 1930.20 5, figs 13-20, 1049:76, ig. 38 and 
T8. fg. 39; Kaplony 1965-9, pl. 1 fig. 14, pl 11 fg. 15), Helwan (Kaplony 1965:8 and 7. 
fg. 11), Abydos (Petrie 1901: pls 1IL2, 6, IMA.S 6, XL1-2, XIV) and Naqada (Emery 
1961:50, f 10} he is not as widely Atested as his predecessor, hor yet has his name 
‘been found outside the Nile valley, 1 is difficult 10 gain an accurate impression from he 
imiled evidence, but a change in the nature of Egypt’ relations with souhem Palestine 
may have been he begianing of a loag-term trend which su reciprocal trade between 
Egypt and is neighbours ultimately replaced by more direct Egyptian exploitarion of 
resources via ouiposts (such as the First Dynasty ‘residency’ at En Besor in southern 
emel) or eatrepûts (peineipally Byblos on he Lebanese coast). To date, only one 
fmgment of Syro-Palestinian pottery has been found in a context datable to the reign of 
Alı: ashen of conbed ware from Abydos tomb BI9 (Adams and Friedman 1992328, n. 
9 [Ashmolean E4029). Two ebony labels of Aha may record royal visits to the Deka 
(Petrie 1901: pl. IIA.S-6), hile another label fro Abydos depicts a campaign against 
Ta-Sety (Pewie 1901: pl. HIL2), the name given ia later periods lo Nubia. Whether he 
label records a seal event or a symbolic activity, in a way he message remains the same: 
Egypt was now looking south with hostile intent, its eyes perhaps fixed on the lucrative 
seade in exotic goods winich passed through he Nubîun Nile valley. 


Early dnt Ea O 


Der 


Aha was succeeded by King Djer wha, if the various reconstructions of the Palermo 
“Stone are to be believe, must have reigned for a considerable period, Kine yeaes fromm 
Dier's reign are recorded on ihe main Cairo ffsgment of the yal annals. Apart om 
recording the biennial royal progress, the following of Honus’, and the fashioning andlor 
dedication of a variely of cul statues, he Cairo agtment also mentions an expedition 1o » 
land named 5 1. This is the name given ler to Wexera Asia generally, und it is difficult 
to be more precise about whieh locality is iotended. The En Besar ‘resideney seems 1o 
have been mnuintained well into the First Dynasty, and it is possible that the Cairo 
fragment refers 1o a trade or punitive expedition to southern Pulestine, Other authors, 
however, have interpreted S ¢ as refering to the Sinai, and this must be a strong 
possibiliy. Ether way, the royal annals seen 10 indicate renewed Egyptian interest of 
aeiviıy beyond EgypE's borders o he northeast. Fragments of at least a dozen vessels of 
‘Syro-Palestinian origin were fouad in Djer's tomb, demonstrating irade between ELypt 
and he Near East (Petrie 1902, pl. 82, 4-6; Bourrisu 181:128 [Catalogue 253]; Serpico 
and White 1996). 

Ii used to be thought that a rock-eut inscription at Gebel Sheikh Suleiman 
Nubia, recording a punitive expedition by Egyptian forces agaiast the local i 
bore the serekl of Djer (for example, Emery 1961:60). I has been conclusively shows 
hat this is not in fact the case; the serek is anonymous, and the inscription dates to the 
lale Predynastic period (Mumane 1987, following Helck 1910:85; ef Baines 1995-102, 
Shaw and Nicholson 1995:86). 

Dier's burial on the Ummm eLQaab at Abydos (Petrie 1901) was accompanied by 
ımumerous subsidiary burials, sorme of which accommodated women of the royal harem. 
The short inseriptions__restricted 10 names and a few titles _on the peivate funerary 
ıstelae hom these subsidiary burials provide some evidenee for the coraposition of the 
soyal cour in the early First Dynasty, although sorve of the inseripcions are not easily 
understood (Amêlinenu 1899: pls XXXIV-XXXVIL, 1904: pl. XVII; Petrie 1901 pls 
XXVIXXIXB), The layout of the royal mortuary complex shows iovpartant innovations, 
and for he first time the tomb on the Unum el-Quab was accompanied by a sparte 
funerary enclosure, itself surrounded by further subsidiary burials, on the low desert 
nearer he town and eulkivarion (Petrie 1925: pl. XVI; Kemp 1966; O Connor 1989). 

"As in the previous reign, craftsmanship of a high quality wras maintained under Djer. 
Among the most impressive artefacts 1o survive is a Tint knife, he handle of which ie 
covered in gold leaf embossed with the King's serekê (Needier 1956). Mealsodking 
reached net levels of excellence, as atested by an impressive hoard 6f copper tools, 
weapons anû vessels found in mastaba S471 at North Saqqara, dated by inscriptions 1o 
he reign of Djer (Emery 1949) Evea oe of the subsidiary graves around the king's 
Abydos funerary enclosure yielded a copper adze incised with the royal serek (Petrie 
1925:4, pls ILL IVS). Marbles similar to those of Aha have survived from Djer's reign 
(Kaplony 1965:6 and 7, fig. 5}, whilst another anefaet probably represents the oldest 
known example of three dimemsional royal statuary: a headless statueue of lightblue 
glazed composition from the Satet temple at Elephantine, showing a figure seed on a 
rone, beans a sign on one side which hus been read as ٨ (Dreyer 1981 Further objecls 
bearing the name of Djer have been found st four sites: Sqqara (Quibell 1923: pls 
VIS, XL2-3, 5, top; Emery 1938:35, fig. &, pls I74, IRA; 161:59, ig. 21; 19393 


66, pl. S.1; 1961:60, ig. 23; Lac and 
Lauer 1959:9, pi pl. 2 nos 4, 14), Tura (Kaiser 194:103, ig 3), Helan 
(Sand 1947.165, ig. 13b), and Abydos (Petrie I901: pls VEZ, XV; 19254, pls 1L8, 14 
15, XIII Spencer 1980:64, pls 47, 53 [eat 458), An ivory lubel of Djer om Abydos 
seems 1o record a royal vik to Bulo and Sals in the Delta (Amêlinenu 1904: pl. X19: 
Emery 1961:59, ig. 20), suggesting that Djec may have maintained his predecessor's 
policy of honouring important shrines. The institution of the biennial royal progress, rst 
Peorded in Djer's eign, may have been initisted for the same reasoa. Djer 1s ao attested 
fiom ouside Egypt, despite the tantalising reference to Setjet on the Cairo fragment of 
he royal annals 


Diet 


The name of Djee's successor is rendered by modern scholars in a variety of forms: Diet 
is the most common, bur Zel, Wadji and Uadji are also used by some authors. la fet, 
here is good evidence for an inital 'W having formed part of he ancient pronunciation: 
ıa ockceut inscription of the king in the western desert south of EAfu preserves a unique 
writing of the King's name, the w3 sign accompanying The usual? sign in the serelh 
(Legrain 1903-221, ig. 7: Porter and Moss 1937-207). Wadjet or Wadjt may, therefore, 
be a more accurate realisation of ihe king's name; buk, as the most frequently used form, 
Djet will be retained here. The Horus-faleoa in the rocl-eut inscription just meationed 
was reported as wearing the double crown. If so, t would be the earliest atested 
occurrence of this element of royal iconography, predating the more famous Abydos 
label of Den by a generation. 

“The indications are that Djct did not enjoy a long eign. Sealings ftom the royal tombs 
at Abydos suggest that the career of onc high offical, Anka, begun in the reign of Djer, 
spanned the entire eign of his successor and continued into the early part of Den s eg 
When the country was under the regency of Queen Merneith (Petrie 1900: pls XIX. 
XX.12-15, 18: 1901: pl. XVL121, 123). The implication is that Djet occupied the throne 
fora comparatively short period, probably less than twenty years. None the less, his reign 
has fumished us with one of he masterpieces of ancient Egyptian ar, the King's 
magnificent funerary stela from Abydos, nov ia the Louvre (Vigna 19354: Enmery 
‘1961:70, pl. 2b; Kemp 1989:38, fg 10). 

n his mocvary provision, Djet followed the pattern established by his predecessor 
(erie 1900, 1901, 1925 pi. XVI Kemp 1966) Other major funency monuments 
dling om the reign of Djet include two large mastabss at Tarklhan, decoeuted with 
niches in the socalled ‘palace cade’ style (Pete et al 1913; Peuie 1914) They 
probably belonged io regional govemors who were keen to demonstrate, by the 
architeeture of Their toby, their funcional and ideological peoximity to the royal court 
(Wilkinson 19034: 211) A miched austaba of even larger proportioas, labelled by its 
excavators mastaba V, was excavated near the village of Nazlet Batran, just south of Giza 
(erie 1907) Sealings of Diet (Pelie 1907-5, pl 111A) have given cise to the suggestion 
that it was eonstrueted for Djct's queen. An alternative explanation is that it belonged to 
Diet's mother, und therefore a wile of Djer's. Like the Naqada royal tanb, mastaba V 
may represent a lavish burial for the king's mother, constructed in the lifetime of her son. 


Barly amas Hap C2 


The name of the occupant is unknown, as are the reasons for the novel location of the 
tol 

"In addition to the fine funerary stela, other antefacts fromm Djet’s reign include an ivory 
coh, engraved with the King's serek and symbols with peobuble cosmological meaning 
(Perie 19254, pls 1L6, XILS: Maleke 198635, Quirke 1990221-2). Metalworking is 
repeeseated by a massive copper axe and a large, copper adze, bot Rom a subsidiary 
burial surrounding Djer’s tomb at Abydos (Pewie 1925: pl V5, 7. A fragmentary 
timestone base fram the town enelosure at Hieeakonpolis may once have suppoded 4 
satu of King Dict (Quibell and Green 1902:48, pl. LIX'D. Trade with Syrin-Palestine is 
Jatested by the pottery vessels of foreign origin found in ioanbs of Djet's reign at Saqqars 
(Emery 1954:75), Tarkan (Petrie er al 1913:16, pls XVII, XIX.24) and Abydos (Petrie 
1925: pl. IVS-10). 


Memenh 


One of the royal tombs exeavated hy Pelıie at Abydos clearly belonged to an individual 
called Mermeith (Pete 1900}: two large funerary stelae wits this name ia raised relief 
were discovered near the tomb (Petrie 1900: pl, LXIV.6; Emery 1961:65, ig. 29; Spencer 
1993:82. fig. 60). Despite the fact that the name is not writen in the customary serekl, 
Petrie at frst believed Merneith to be a king, like the owners of the other tans on the 
Umm el-Qnab, It has since been realised that the name belonged 10 a queen, more 
properly realised as Merftneith, ‘beloved of Neils’. From the many sealings Of Den 
found in Memeith's tomb, Egyplologists surmised ihat Merneith must have been the 
King's mother. This has been coafirmed by the recently discovered necropolis sealing 
fiom the tomb of Den, which ends with the signs denoting ‘king's mother Mer(îineith'. 
is clear that Memeith must have occupied an unusually important position for her to have 
been granted the privilege of a tomb oa the Umm el-Qaab. (Interestingly, the necropolis 
seal of Qıa, modelled closely on Den's, omits Mermeith ton the list of First Dynasty 
ules; this may indicnte that, after the reign of Den himself, Memeith was no longer 
accorded equal status o the de jure kings of the First Dynasty.) seems virtually certain 
hat Memeith acted as regent during Den's minority: Djet must therefore have did while 
Den was still a child. Memeith may have been the senior royal wife of Djct, alhough her 
influence seems to have derived fom her position as the mother of the next king. 
Certainly, Den's name features prominently on the seslings from her tomb, even host 
whieh are thought to dale ta her own regency. One Egyptologist hus speculated that she 
was alo the duughter and heivess of Djer, and thus connected with three conseculive 
kings of Egypt (Lauer 1966175-7). This is an atiraetive theory, but one which cannot, at 
present, be proven. 

‘The segency of Memeith is the first anested oceasion in Egyptian history when a 
waman held the reins of power. As de facie miler of Egypt, Memet seems to have been 
accorded a full royal moruary complex at Abydos. However, outside Abydos she is 
poocly attested. This is ot suprising, since all official documents (including seals) 
rav up during her segency would have bome the name of the reigning king, Den, 
despite is minority. An unprovenanced alabaster cylinder vessel bears Merneilh'S name 
in relief (Kaplony 1964: fig. 1075), snd a further three vessel fragments from Saqqara 
show her name seratehed on the surface (Emery 1954:141 and 142, figs 205-6). The most 


notable object marked with he name of Memet is a small ivory vessel from he 
‘Saqqara region (Kaplony 1964: i. 1073) 


Den 


The name of Egypt's next ruler is usally rendered as Den, although this is unlikely to be 
an accurate reslisution, The meaning of the name is as obscure as ils peoper 
pronunciation, despite 1he efforts of several scholars at decipheament (S. Schott 195639; 
Kaplony 1958; Melzer 1972; Godroa 1990). Den has been called ‘one of the most 
important rulers of the First Dynasty” (Lauer 1966:1778), his reign lauded as marking "a 
significant stage in the cultural and material development of Early Dynastic Egypt 
(Whitehouse 1987-261), Without doubt, he is the bext attested king of the First Dynasty. 

His tomb at Abydos (Petrie 1901)_marked in traditional style by a pair of fanerary 
ıstelae, of which oaly one survives (Amdlineau 1899: pl. XLI; Baity e1 al 1988:15 
shows an important new feature in Egyptian mortuary architecture, an entrance stainway 
giving access to the burial chamber. This facilitated the provisioning of the tomb and he 
burial itself, and was swilly adopted throughout Egypt in private as well as royal tombs, 
J highlights the reign of Den as a period of ianovaion; and this ts reflected, o, in the 
king's titular. The file nowhip, literally ‘he of the reed and bee’, and bet translated 
ıa “dual king, fit sppeies in he reign of Den. It probably signifies a corresponding 
development in the ideology of divine kingship, The invenion of the double crown ~ 
combining the Older red and white crows Lis another innovation usually atibuted 1o 
he reign of Den (Edsrards 1971-26); although, as we have seen, it may have already 
ocurred in the preceding reign of Det 

Den seems to have enjoyed a long reign, even taking into account his accession as û 
cild. A recently discovered 1imestone vessel fragment fom the soulh-west annex 10 
Den's tomb menrions ihe second occasion of the Sed festival)’ (Dreyer 1990:80, fig. 9, 
pl. 26.0). This is the firs indication that Den may have celebcated two such festivals (ef 
Petrie 1900: pl. XIV-12), which would imply a long reign. (For the signifcance of the 
“Sedestival, see Chapter ©) The number of élite tombs s1 Noqh Saqqura is greater Or 
Den's reign than for any other reign of the First or Second Dynasty. Moreov: 
insufficient space at is se seems 10 have necessitated fhe establishment of a nev dite 
cemetery at Abu Ravwash (Plate 3.1) on the norlhem ege of the Memphite necropolis 
(Monte 1038, 1946: Klasens 1961). Together with several large tombs at busi (Leclant 
and Clere 192-242, 194:376, pls XV, XVI, gs 13, 14) and Helwan, the North Saqqars 
and Abu Ravash mastabas form a collection of well over 30 dile burials dated 10 Den's 
feign. Such a dramatic Increase in the number OF officials able to coeamand a high-status 
feeb must reflect more than fhe mere length of Dens reign: i seems likely that changes 
were carried our in the structure of government. Institutional change is also suggested by 
he Palermo Stone entry for year x34 0f Den's reign, which reeonls 3 “census of all the 
people of the north, west and cast’ (Sclifer 1902-19) It would not be surprising if an 
accurate assessment of the county's population and resources accompanied 
administraive refoms. 

"Other salient events of Den's reign are recorded on several coatempocary year labels 
nd in the third register of the Palermo Stone. The king seems to have taken a particu 
interest in Egypt felons with her neighbours to the north-east: his second name (Zini 


e at Rw 


or Haat, written with the sig foc high deserfareiga land, may have been chose to 
fleet 


Plate 3.1 Abu Rawash: the élite First Dynasty 
cemetery on Hill M (author's photograph) 
The pyramids of Giza are visible on the 
horizon. 


he king's particular preoccupation with Egypt's northreastem frontier zone (Godeon 
1900). No fewer than ive labels record miltary activity in southern Palestine, whether 
weal o; rial (see Chapter 5), Possible sealings of Den Troan the First Dynasty Egyptian 
building at En Besor provide further evidence for Egyplian involvement in the area 
(Schulman 1980, 1983-250). Year x2 of Den's reign on the Paleemo Stone seconds he 
smiling of the ‘ume, a won indicating the nomads of the eastem of western desert 
Eight years laler, the annals second the destructioa of an unidetified, possibly Asiatic, 
locality named HAT At least 76 complete examples of imported Syro-Pulestinian 
vessels, plus countless fragments, have been excavated from contexts dutable to the rele 
of Den, by far the largest number fromm any Early Dynastic reign. The impression they 
give is one of sustained and intensive contact between Egypt and the Near East during he 
Middle of ihe First Dynasty. 

Cuhi activity, oo, is well attested during Dens reign. Visi to important shrines, the 
foundation of a nev temple called ‘thrones of the gods’. and the fıshioning or dedication 
of divine images are all menioned on the Palermo Sone. The Gerce feline goddess 
Maflet_ probably a royal protectress_ wis unusually prominent, featuring both on the 
Palermo Sone and on an alibaster jar fromm Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. VIL). The running 
of the Apis bull revered at Memphis is recorded in the annals for year x+12, 
cormoborated by a sealing fiom Saqqara (Emery 1938:64, fig, 26) Particularly noteworthy 
are The references Irom Den's reis to rituals involving a hippopotamus (see Chapter 8 


A group of graves near the Serapeum at Saqqara may once have delineated û clic 
enclosure built for Den (Kaiser 1985a), although there are problems with this 
interpretation (see Chapter). 

Finally, objects from Abydos and Saqqars highlight he extmordinary artistic 
achievemeats of Den's crufsmen. The lavish tomb of Hemaka (Emery 1938) 
Chancellor and perhaps the most important figure in the administrıtion after the king 
himself yielded a wealth of artefacts, ranging fron inlaid gaming dises to a cire 
wosden box containing the oldest papyrus to survive from Egypt. A copper bowl 
inscribed with the name of Den was included as an heirloom in te tomb equipment of 
King Semerkhel, whilst an inscribed ivory was buried in the ‘Main Deposit" at 
Hierakonpolis (Whitehouse 1987) Amongst ihe most remarkable products of Fayptian 
craftsmen fiom any period are the Early Dynastic stone vessels carved in a bewîkiering 
array OF forms, ranging from imitations of reed baskets to flowers. Several complete 
examples have been excavated froan grwves dating 1 the reign of Den, including a three. 
lobed dish om the tomb of the King himself (Peuie 1901: pl. L). Many fagments fromm 
he same context (for example, Armdlineau 1899: pis XXVILXXVII, 1904: pl. 1%) are 
curently being studied, and show highly sophisticated designs. A number of simpler 
‘stone vessels inscribed with one or other of Den's names were among tlne hoard found in 
he galleries beneath he Step Pyramid st Saqqara (Laeau and Lauer 1959) 


Anelib 


A series of insetibel stone vessels fron this same hoanl first allowed scholars to establish 
he sequence of kings fons Den to the end of the Fist Dynasty (Lacau and Lauer 1959: 
pl. 4. nos 19-21; cf Emery 1961:73), More recently, the order has been eoafiammed by the 
acropolis sealing of Qua Tron Abydos. There is thu no doubt that Dea was followed by 
ıa king named Anedjib. la comparison with Den, line is known of his successor. He 
seems lo have enjoyed a relatively long reign, since at least two stone vessel fragment 
one rom Saqqara (Quibell 1923: pl. XXXIILS) and the other from Abydos (Petrie 
1900:20, pl. VIL; Kaplony 1965), mention a Sed-festival. Anedjib's name has been 
found at only three sites in Egypt Saqqara (Emery 184982, fg, 45: Lacau and Lauer 
195910-11, pl 5 nos 234, pl 6 nos 26-7, 29, pl. 7 nos 30-3; Poner and Moss 
1974:43), Helwan (Saad 195 1:109, pl. Lila) and Abydos (Amélineau 1899: pl XXXII 
(lef middle), 1902: pl. XKL4; Petrie 1900: pls VIS-11, XXVIXXVII, XLV, 1901: pl 
XLIV.T Porter and Moss 1937:82; Emery 1049:82, fig. 47), His name may also occur oa 
mmo seslings from the Egyptian building at En Besor (Schulman 1980,1983-250). The 
production Of royal statuary is attested indirectly: several stone vessels with Anodjib's 
erek shou statues of the King in various guises. Otherwise, almost the only artefacts 
fom his reign are two inscribed white marbles, unşeovenanced and now in 4 private 
seollection (Kaploay 1965:6 and 7. iz. 8). 

Like his predecessors, Anedjib was buried on the Unum el-Qanh at Abydos (Petrie 
1900) However, he most ioıportant monument of his reign is he large mastalba S3038 a1 
North Saqqarı (Emery 1949:82 94, pls 21_35 probobly buile for the highest official in 
the royal aminitraon, What makes S4038 unique, and a landmark in the longertenm 
development of Egyptian mortuary architecture and symbolism, is the hidden tumulus 
covering the burial chamber, Enûrely covered by the superstnuelure of the toh, this 


By aie Ba 6 


tumulas is not a simple mound but futher a stepped construction. It seems to point the 
way to the design OF the Step Pyramid adopted for soyal tombs in the Third Dynasty 
(Emery 1961146, fig. 8S). IF is, of course, possible that earlier lombs at Saqqarı may 
have command forerunners of ihe mound whieh were not recognised at the time of 
excavation, Likewise, because of he poor state of preservation of he First Dynusty royal 
tombs at Abydos we cannot be certain that the torab of Den did not originally iaclude & 
modified version of the hidden mound discovered in his predecessor's 1omb (Hendeickx, 
personal communication). However, in the absence OF such evidence, the reign of 
‘Anedjib remains most noteworthy, not foe the achievements of he King himself, but Foe 
ıa architectural innovation in the tons of ane of his officials. 


Semerthet 


"Some doubts have been raised conceming the legitimacy of he next king, Semerkhet. His 
toanb at Abydos contained a number of stone vessels of his predecessor, reinseribed for 
Semesklhet This suggested 10 some scholars that Semerkhet may have been a usurper 
(Emery 1961:84; Lauer 1966178, n, 5) However, it has been rigblly poiated out hat he 
stone vessels from the Step Pyramid at Saqqars bearing a sequence of four royal names 
(Dea-Anedjib-Semerkhet-(Paa) argue against such an interpretation (Laver 1966:1789) 
Most recently, the necropolis sealing of Qua seems to peove beyond doubt Semerkhet's 
1egitimsey, at east in the eyes Of his sees. 


Semerklhet's reign was probably the shortest of the Fit Dynasty. The Cairo fragment of 
the annals preserves a complete record of his eighw-ani-acbalf years on the throne of 
Egypt Unforwunalely, he events seconded on the annals are nothing more than the regular 
ceremonies of Kingship (auch as the biennial “following of Hocus’ and the fin 
ùappearances’ of the king) and the fishioning or dedication of divine images. A year label 
of Semerkhet fron the tomb of Qa (Figure 3.3) recocds the planning of a building named 
Hiri ru perhaps Semerllher's funerary enclosure at Abydos (Dreyer e al. 1996:73, 
pl 14d). Trade with he Near East seems to have been maintained during his reign, albeit 
a reduced scale compared with the middle OF the First Dynasty. Fragments from 10 or 
H1 imported Syro-Palestinian vessels were found in Semeckhet's tomb (Petrie 1901: pl. 
LIV: Kantor 1965: figs SB. SE Adams and Feiedman 1902-328, n. 9), and a 
contemporary grave at Abusir contained a painted, handled lak typical of Early Bronze 
Age vessels from Syria-Palestine (Bonnet 1928:3510, pl. 27; Kantor 1965 ig. SF). The 
year label menrioned earlier ras originally attached to û container of oil, deseribed as 
‘Grstquality choice oil ron the Milkplant” N has been suggested that hs 3-all may have 
been imported fron Libya (Dreyer er al. 1996:74). 


Figure 33 Year label of Semerkhet The label was 
recently discovered during re-excavation 
ofthe tomb of his successor Qan (alter 
Dreyer er al 1996: pl. 14d). 


Semerklhet's is the only First Dynasty reign not represented among the dite tombs at 
Narth Saqqara. This is not surprising if he only reigned for eight years: he igh oficial 
who served Semekhet no doubt survived his royal master, and may have continwed 1o 
sene la he government under Semerkher's successor. Several €lte tombs at North 
Saqqara are duel to the reign of Qaa, and one of hese may well have belonged to a 
leading figure at Semeckhet's count. lale, an official named Henuka evidently served 
bol Semerkhet and his successor Qan, since Henuka's name appears on year labels of 
bol kings fom Abydos (Peuie 1900: pl. XVIL26, 28; Dreyer 1993: 10; Spencer 
1993.67). Semeriher's tomb shows a change of plan Rom previous generations (Peuie 
1900). The subsidiary burials are arranged immediately adjacent 10 the mais burial 
chamber, and would probsbly have been covered by he same superstructure. This 
implies thar the occupants of the subsidiary burials the King's retainers and pethaps 
Women of he harem were buried st fhe same time as the King, in hun sugdesling 
retainer saerifce. The architecture of Semerkhet's tomb complex may represent « 
deliberate aıtermpt to emphasise ihe king's power of life and death over his subjects in & 
rather teral way. The oaly object of note 1o survive Rom Semerklhel's reign is a blaek 
granite funerary sela, one of a pair which originally stood in ont of the King's tomb 
(Amines 1899-245, fg. 65) 


Early dynastic Hap GS 


o 


Qas was the builder of the last tomb and funerary enelosure at Abydos until the site was 
readopted ss the royal burial ground towanls the end of the Second Dynasty. Quaî's Iomb 
o the Lm el-Qaab (Petrie 1900) follows the same plan as his predecessor s, suggesting 
ıa cotinuation of the practice of retainer saeriîce. The accompanying funerary enclosure 
has not been positively idearified, but i is likely that the walled Coptic village of Deir 
‘Sî Damiana ineorparates the monument (Kaiser 1969:2). Several large mastabas at 
North Saqqara are dated 10 the reign OF Qaa, suggesting that t may have been a long one. 
This view is supported by a agment of a siltstone bow ftom Saqqara which mentions 
he king's second Sel-fesival (Lacau and Lauer 1959:12, pl. § ne. 41). Moreover, he 
different building phases of his tomb at Abydos seem to have been separated by 4 
‘significant period of time (Engel, in Dreyer er al. 1996-57-71). The first year of his rela 
is mecoaled on he rmuin Cairo fragment of the royal annals; the compartment lists the 
usual ceremonies associated with dhe accession of a new king. Several year labels 
discovered in the king's tomb at Abydos reeord events ranging from the royal progress 
(the following of Horus’) to he collection of timber for the soyal workshops, froen the 
foundaron of a religious building (named q3w- rw) to the celebration of various cultie 
festivals. The running of he Apis bull sand the festival of Sokar seem to have been 
celebrated periodically during Qaa’s reign, whilst an obscure festival involving a divine 
Of royal bark is also recorded (see Chapter 8). 

1n addition to sealings and labels from the three major Early Dynastic cemeteries 
Saqqara (Emery 194:116 and 123, fig. 6TB, 1954-107, gs 123 and 127, fig. 200, 
1954:33, 97, 109, pls 28e, g, 347.1-5, 10611, 124.1-2, Lacau and Lauer 1959:12, pls & 
nos 40-Î, 9 hos 44 €) and its noathrand extension at Abusir (Leclant and Ciere 19%2: pl 
XV, fas 17, 18, Helan (Saad 1951-29 and 30, fig. 11, pl. XXIXa; Kaplony 1963, 1 
149) and Abydos__Qaa is also atested in the dec south of Egypt, near Elkab. A rocket 
inscription in he Wadi Hellal shows he serekl of Qua icing a figure of the local 
goddess, Nekhbet Ia between are some less easily identifiable signs, perhaps sn an and 
ıa wa-sceplre. A similar foekcut inscription, though without the additional signs, occurs 
hear the small hannlet of Naga eLOqblya, shout te Kilometres north of Elkab (Huyee 
1984; Hendricks, personal communication, has pointed out that Huyge erroneously 
located the inseripûon at es-Sib 1ya). The nature of Qas's activity im this region is 
unknown, but an expedition to exploit the desert's resources is a plausible suggestion. 
Cantaets further afield are hinted aî by an ivory gaming rod from the King's tomb (Petie 
1900: pl, XIL12-13, pl. XVIL30). One side shows the gure of a bound Asiatic captive, 
identilied by the hieroglyph above his head as an inhabitant of S' £ The figure probably 
stands for Egypt's enemies in general, and cunnot be taken as proof of punitive raids 
against southem Palestine in fhe reign of Qas. None the les {he gaming rod does 
demonstrate Egyptian acquaintance wih the inhabitants of Western Asta, and 18 
imparted Syro-Bslestinian vessels fron toaibs st North Saqqara dating ta the reign of Qaa 
pont to continued trade between Egypt and is nortlxeastern neighbours. Craftsmanship 
fom the reign of Qua is represented by three copper bowls from his tomb at Abydos 
(Dreyer et al. 1996:75-6, pl. 15B). To of hem are inscribed with the king's serekî and 
ıa accompanying text mentioning coun instinutioas including the royal palace. 


"Ba and Sefera 


“The change of dynasty after the reign of Qas is likely to have had a political ingredient 1t 
may be no coincidence that Tso ephemeral Horus names are attested fiom the period The 
fs of these, writen with bind and possibly sead as ‘Ba’, oceues only once, an s stone 
vessel fragment from the Step Pyramid (Lacau and Lauer 1959: pl. IV.) The similarity 
of the accompanying text 4o known inseripticas of Qes sugges that the vessel may 
originally have been inscribed for Qa, and usurped by the Horus Ba’ (Helck 1979:14) 
The secoad ame associated with the end of Qaa's reign is the Horus Sneferka. The name 
is aested tice: once on a fragment ofa siltsıone plate found in he surfice debcis of the 
North Saqqara tlle cemetery (Emery 1958: pls 2a, 38.1); and once on a similar plate 
fiom the Step Pyramid galleries (aca and Lauer 159:15, pl. 17 no. 16). la both cases, 
he other sign groups ia the ieseription are associated elsewhere with the serekê of Qa 
(Emery 1958:31). On the plate from the Step Pyramid, the name Sneferka seems 10 be 1 
iner addition within Ihe serekl. Neither ‘Ba’ nor Snelerka appears in ler king lists. 1 
hey were usurpes, they are likely to have been viewed as illegitimate by their 
successors, and expunged roa the historical record. Perhaps more plausible, at least i 
fhe case of Sneferka, s he suggestion that this was an ahermative Horus name, adopted 
by Qua for a short period. The discovery of sealings oF Hetepsekhermwy in the tanh of 
Qua seems to peove that there was a smooth iraesition becwrecn the First and Second 
Dynasties (see below. 


THE SECOND DYNASTY 


The kings who ruled Egypt between the death of Qua and the accession of 
NejerikheDjoser are some of the most shadowy figures fiom the entire span of 
Egypilan history (ef. Dodsoa 1996), The inseripions and monuments from the period 
record a plethora of royal names, as do the surviving King lists The names froot these 
o sels of sources bear Mle relation to cach other. It has proved dificult, if not 
impossible, to reconcile the varying lists and sequences, and scholars today are searecly 
mere coalident about the intemal history of the Second Dynasty han were heir 
predecessors a generation ago. The identity and order of the first three kings is certain, 
hanks 1o an inscribed statue hn the Caio Museum The contemporary monunments and the 
iter king lists can be reconciled with reasonable certaioty foc the first five nulees of the 
dynasty, whilst Khasekhemy is univenally acknowledged as the last King of he 
dynasty. In contrast, fhe poshions of the intervening rulers—and indeed the extent of 
heir auihocity are obscure. Internal tensions during the middle of the Second Dynasty 
are suggested by the appearance of Seth ia he royal tinulary under Poribsen, the very 
diferent King lists drawa up for ihe dynasty in later periods (whereas the king lists agree 
to a notable ewent on the composition of the First Dynasty), and the references under 
Khasekhem to batiles agaiast northern enemies (Kaiser 1992184-5, n. 44). I is possible 
shat, for a period in the middle of the dynasty, power was divided berween kings in the 
north and soulh of the country. A study of Nile levels recorded on the Palermo Stone 
(Bell 1970) indicates that there was a significant deo in he average height of the annual 
inundation afer he end of he First Dynasty Hence, it is possible that ecological factors 
may have played a part in the apparent teasions (Hoflinan 1980-312} With coosiderable 


Barly dnutie Eat 0 


uncertainties surrounding the order and number of rulers, an accurate estimate for the 
length of the Second Dynasty is impossible. A figure of one hundred and twenty-one 
years has been proposed (Baines and Milek 1980:36), but his is no more than an 
educated guess. 


Hetepsethemey 


We cannot be certain why the death of Qua marked the end of a dynasty. The fist King of 
ıhe Second Dynasty seems t0 have legkimised his postion by overseeing the burial of his 
predecessor, oF at least by honouring his eortuary cul: sealings of Hetepsekhenmwry have 
recently ben diseovesed in the offering chambers nearest the entance of Qaa’s tomb 
(Dreyer 993b: Il: Dreyer ef al 1996-71-2, fig. 25, pl. 14a). For his own burisl 
Hetepsekhemuy broke with tradition and abandoned the ancestral necropolis of Abydos 
iin vou ofa ste adjacent to the capital, The relocation of the royal mortuary complex to 
Saqqara represents a fundamental change, and must have some historical significance, 
even If we are unable 1o be moce specie. Furthermore, the design of the soyal tomb af 
"Saqqara was entirely new, necessitated, at least in part, by the different nature of the roek 
strata at Saqqara compared with Abydos (see Chapter 1). 

‘The large gallery tomb at Saqqara ras identified as Hetepsekhenmwy's on the basis of 
numerous sealimşeessions (Barsanti 1002; Maspero 1902 Apart fom these sealings, 
he tomb was virtually empty. Objects bearing he name of Hetepsekhemy have, 
however, come to light elsewhere. The best known is the pink granite statuette oF 
Hetepdicl, a priest who evidently served the mortuary cults of Hetepsekhemwy and his 
mmo successors (Fischer 1961:46, fg. 1; Malek 1986:32) 1n addition, an Early Dynastic 
grave at Badurî contained an alabuster vessel fragment inseribe with the serek of 
Hatepsekhermwy, the name of an estate, and the tide of a mortuary priest (Brunton 1927: 
pl XIX2S) A cup of black gnkte bearing he name of Hetepsekhemwy is 
peovenancal (Kaploay 1965-23, pl IV, fig. 48), while a bone cylinder wich probably 
formed the finial of a shaft or pûrt of piece of furniture is said to be ftom Helwan 
(Nedier 1984-375, 379, pl. 84, ig, #4). Two inscribed stone bowls were found in he 
pyramid complex Gf Menkaura at Giza (Reisner 1931:102 and 186, fig. 57.37, pl. 70.C) 
Further examples of ‘heirlooms’ are the stone vessel fagments from ihe tombs oF 
Peribsen (Petrie 1901: pl. VIILS-11) and Khasekhemwy (Amêlineau 1902: pl. XXL) 
sand numerous inscribed stone vessels from he Step Pyramid complex (Lacau and Lauer 
1959: pls 10-12). These later focmed part of the accumulated ritual material from the 
royal magazines, collected together by Netjecikhet o furmish his burial. The inseriptions 
provide most of our meagre information on the reign of Hetepsekhemy. 


Nera 


"Very litle is known about Hetepsekhemwy's suecessot; these is even some dispute about 
she reading Of his name. It used 10 be realised as ‘Ranch’, foc R ADI ‘Ra is (my) lord 
(r example, Baines and Milek 198036, Trigger er al 183:70): but recently, the 
fivoured realing of the king's name reverses the two clements to give NF . ‘lod of the 
sun. According 1o this view, the word would simply be the name of the sun, not yet 
e name ofthe solar deity (Quike 1990234). 


Sealing of Nebra were found togeher with those of Hetepsekhenmwy in he royal 
gallery tomb st Saqqara (Barsantî 1902; Maspero 1902), suggesting that Nebra overcast 
ihe burial of his predecessor. Confirmation that Nebra succeeded Hetepsekhemwy is 
provided by a stone bowl frog the Step Pyrmid which shows the juxtaposed serekhs of 
he two kings (Lacau and Laver 1959: pl. 11 no, 5E) and by the statue of Hetepdief 
menioned earlier. There is also a Mint bowl of Hetepsekhenwwy, reinscribed by Nebra, 
fiom the Menkaura pyramid complex (Reisner 131:102, pl. 0.e), The same practice 
was evidently continued by Nebea's successor, since a bowl with the serek of Nebra, 
sewed by Ninetjer, was found in the lom of Peribsen at Abydos (Pewie 1901: pl 
VMIL12). The most famous afefet created foc Nebra is his fine funerary stela of pik 
granite (Fischer 1961. His the fist royal sicla to come fom a site other than Abydos, 
and laeks the raised border typical of First Dynasty funerary stielae. Although found ai 
Mît Rahina, it seems certain thst Neb's stela oace stood a front of his tomb, which 
must therefore be İocaled st Saqqara. One possibility is that the gallery tomb constructed 
for Hetepsekhemuy was in fact appropriated by his successor. Altematively, the galleries 
beneath ihe Wester Massif and Below the North Court of Netjecikhe's Step Pyramid 
complex may have been Second Dynasty soyal tombs, Nebra is further anestel only 
ence his serekî is cut on a rock at Sle 34, behind Amant in the western desert (Winkler 
1938, 1: pl. XLA; Emery 1961:93, fig. S6). The sile is close 1o an ancient trade route 
inking the Nile valley With the western oases, and the inscription suggests that Nebra 
mounted an expedition outside the Nile valley. 


Nineyjer 


By far the best atestel king of the carly Second Dynasty is Ninetjer, Nebra's successor. 
“The posilion of his itulary on the Palermo Stone suggests that he must have been on he 
throne for at least thirty-five years (ef. Helek 1979.128). Three higlrstatus tombs in the 
dle cemetery s1 North Saqqars contained sealings of Ninetjer (S2171: Quibell 1923: p1 
XV, Porter and Most 1914436 S2302 (which probably belonged to the Overseer of 
Seulptorn, Nir 30): Quitell 1923:30, pl. XVILS: Porter and Moss 1974437; SOK: 
Quîbell 1923.84-5 Porter and Moss 1974:40), a did a tomb across the Nile in the Early 
Dynastic necropolis at Helwan (S05 H4: Sad 1951:17, pis Xia, b, XIlLa). Flve 
different jarseslings of the King were discovered in a large mastaba near Giza (Pete 
1907:7, pl. VE Further sealings of Nineger (S Hassan 1938-521; Foner and Moss 
1974.613) lel to the Hdentifieation of he king's own tomb at Saqqıra, Locuted some 130 
metres east of Hietepsekbemy's (Nebra's?) monument, Ninejer's tomb follows a 
similar design (Kaiser 1992.180, fg. 4). 

Much of what we know about Ninetjer's reign derives fron the annals of the Palermo 
‘Stone. The whole of the fourth register of the stone comprises years from the carly and 
middle parts of his feign, namely year S or 6 t0 year 20 or 21 (Seher 1902-22 6, pl. 1 
“The foundation of a chapel or estate, named Hr. is recorded for year T, but, otherwise, 
most of the epoayous events are ihe regular ual appearances of the king anû various 
religious festivals The festival of Sokar seems to have been celebeatad at intervals of six 
Years, while 1he running of the Apis bul is seconded wee, in yeaes 9 and 15, With he 
exeeptioa of a ceremony in year 19 associated with Nekhbet, goddess of the Elkab area, 
he festivals recoded foc Ninetjer's reign are closely connected with the Menphite 


Barly ajmastie Hap 72 


region. This may be sigaiticant apart from stone vessels reused for he burials of 
Peribsen and Khusekhemwy at Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. VIIL13; and Amêlineau 1902: 
pl XXLS, respectively), Ninetjer is not anested ouside the Memphike region. lt is 
Possible that eourt aeliviy ia the early Second Dynasty was largely, if not enti 
confined to Lower Egypt. This might aceount for the intemal tensions maybe 
mounting 1o evil war which appear to have engulfed the country towards the end of 
Nineljer's reign. The Palermo Stone hints at possible unrest in Nineğer's year 13 (Scher 
1902:24), The etry reads ‘fest feast of Dur3-Hrzpt Atueking the towns of Sn? and 
H3’. The mame of the seeond locality means ‘nort landî, and somme have interpre this 
entry as recording the suppression of a rebellion in Lower Egypt (Emery 1961.93) 
Alhough fhe Palermo Stone breaks of aller year 19, two further events which probably 
belan 1o the Iter part of Ninejer's feign are Known Rom stone vessel inseripûons. The 
fourth occasion of the Sakar festival’ (Lacau and Lauer 196588, ig. 172 [no. 23 
Helek 119:128) peobably took place in year 24, judging by the periodic nature of its 
celebration; the ‘seventeenth occasion of he [biemial] census (Lacau and Laver 
1965:80, fig. 173 Ino. 274]: Helek 179:128) will have occured in year 34. 

With so long a reign, it is likely that Ninetjer celebrated at least one Setl-festival, No 
contemporary inscriptions attest such an cceaslon, although the statuete of the king 
discussed below is certainly suggestive. The stock of stone vessels found in the Step 
Pyramid galleries may originally have been prepared for Ninejer's Sed-festival (Helek 
1979). According to this theory, the vessels remained in the magazine at Saqqara and 
were never distributed because intemal unrest had already broken out. disrupling 
communications and weakening the authority of the central administration; the vessels 
ere subsequenlly apprvpriated by kings of the late Second and early Thin Dynasties. 
This hypothesis is certainly appealing and hus received recent support Rom Buto 
(Fallings and Kûhler 1996:10 snd n. 52): an analysis of the pouery fom the Early 
Dynastic level V indicates a date not later than the reign of Perîbsen; the same level also 
yielded sesl-impressions naming Iy-enhnum, one of he most promineat officials 
mentioned on one vessels ftom the Step Pyramid galleries, and placed by Helck in the 
feign oF Ninetjer 

The stamette of the mortuary priest Hetepdief indicates continuity between the first 
“three kings of the Second Dynasty, heir mortuary cults beng served by one and he same 
individual. Ninetjer certainly maintained the moray cult of one predecessor: an 
insevibed sone vessel from the Step Pyramid juxtaposes the serek of Ninetjer anl the 
rchapel of Hetepsekhemwy (Lacau and Lauer 1959: p1. 15 no. 74). Apart fiom the 
numerous lnseibed sioe vessels (Lacau and Lauer 1959: pls 13-16, caly wo objets 
bearing fhe name of Ninetjer have survived. One is a small ory vessel ffomm dhe Saqqarı 
region (Kaplony 1964: fig- 1074). The oer i of far grenter importance i the history of 
Eayptlan art: an alabaster statuelie of he king, enthroned and wearing the close-fiting 
sobe associated with the Sed-festival (Simpson 1956). The statuerte sepeeseats The earliest 
complete and identifiable example of taree-dimensional soyal sevar oan Ey. 


Plate 32 King Ninetjer. Crude stone statuette of 
unknown provenance, now in the Cieorges 
Michailides Collection (photograph 
courtesy ofthe Egypt Exploration 
Society) 


Aڱ‎ we have seen, there are indications of a breakdown in central authority at the end 
Nineer's eign. Before onder was e-established towards the end of the Second Dynasty: 
he kingship seems 1 have been held by a number of ephemeral rulers who are only 
poorly atested in comtemporary inscriptions (Figure 34) Ninetjer's immediate suecesso, 
Jat least in the north of Egypt, Was a king whose nswf-bûy name has been fead as Wene 
(Ganiseloft 144-288-915 His Horus name remains unknown (ef Wildung 196b: Hele 
191:131). An unpublished inscription of Weneg from a mastaba at Norh Saqqara 
(S3014: Laeau and Lauer 1959:16, n. 2) is very similar 1o a inseription of Ninetjet 
(Lae and Lauer 1959: no. 6E), suggesting that this may be another case of a King se. 
cutting one of his predecessor's 


Bic dyautie Eyl. 74 


Figure 34 Ephemeral rulers, 1: Weneg (1) and 
Nubnefer (2). Both kings seem to have 
ruled in the middle of the Second Dynasty. 
The royal names were incised on stone 
vessels found in galleries beneath the Step 
Pyramid of Netjerikhet at Saqqara (after 
Lacau and Lauer 1959: planches V4, 
VLA 


sone vessels (Helek 1979.124), A seead stone vessel fiom the same Saqqars tomb 
ames the Iwo tutelary goddesees of Upper and Lower Egypt, Nekhbet and Wadjet 
(Kaplony 1965-7, figs 6 and 8, 16. 6 Helck 1979-131) However, Weneg is unattested 
ouside Saqqara and there is no evidence to confirm that his rule extended into the south 
ofthe county. Tele stone bowls from he Step Pyramid complex name Weneg (Lacau 
and Lauer 1959: pls 19 no. 105, 20 nos 101-7) Weneg's tons hus not been located. If, as 
is likely, i followed the patter of earlier Second Dynasty tombs and comprised a se of 
subterreun galleries, then it may lie beneath he Noh Court of Netjerikher's Step 
Pyramid complex. Aliernatively, there is a possibility that other Second Dynasty royal 
icab once stood to the south of the Helepsekhenwy and Ninejer galleries; this would 
explain the location of Sekhemkhet's step pyramid enclosure some distance to the west 
The whole area was levelled by nas for the construction of his pyramid and causeway. 


Semed 


According to laler king lists, Ninetjer’s secoad successor was a king with the nsw 
name Sened (Helek 1984). Unfortunately, there are no proven eoatepoeary inseriptions 
of this ruler. The best piece of evidence is a block, iaseribed vith ihe words anwt-hiy 
Sd, reused in the funerary temple of King Khafts at Giza (Steindocff, in U Hblseher 


1912.106). It may be Second Dynasty, although the epigraphy of the inscription would 
tend to suggest 3 slightly later date. Aa uadisputed Fourth Dynasty inseripion, in he 
tomb of Shery, peovides the second mention of a King Senet, and indicates that his 
mortuary cult was celebrated 3t Saqqara and was sll current Over one hundred Years 
after his death (Grdselofî 194:294, Wildung 1960, pl 1112; Kaiser 1991), Shery 's tiles 
Suggest a connection between Ihe mortuary cults of Sened and Peribsen, a King of he 
‘Second Dynasty who is otherwise only atested in Upper Egypt. If Sene ruled only ia the 
north of Egypt and Pecibsen only in the south, the juxta-pesiion of heir twvo mortuary 
cults at Saqqara may indicate that the territorial division of he country whieh is proposed 
after he reign of Ninejer was amicable at first (Heiek 1979:12) The only omer 
occurrence of Sened's name is oa the belt of a Late Period bronze statwene of a king 
(Wildung 196b: pl IV.) This suggests that, however cbseure Sened may be to modern 
Eypiolgy, be was still sermembered by his countuymen centuries afer his death, As 
wh Wene, Sened's iomb has not bee dentiied. Given he reference to his mortuary 
cult ia the inseription of Shery, it must have beza located somewhere in the Saqqars 
necropolis. H has been suggested, though without fim evidence, hat the galleries 
benealh the Western Massif of the Step Pyramid complex may have been Seneds tomb, 
since the tomb of Shery (overseer of the King's mortuary priests) probably lay a shoei 
ıdistunee to the north (Dodson 1996:24) 


Niner 


This name is attested just twice, oa stone vessels from the Step Pyramid (Lacau and 
Lauer 1959: pl VL3-4 [nos 99-100] By a network of associations, we may conclude 

yat Ninetjer an Nubnefer were near eoateqnporarics (Helek 1979-124). Nubnefer cannot 
easily be the nfwt-By name of Ninetjer, since is name is known (ît is also Niner) 
Nubnefer may, therefoce, have been an ephemeral ruler who held the kingship briclly 
during the period of unrest which seems 10 have followed the death of Ninetjer. His exact 
place in he order of succession cannot be established 


Perham 


Cansiderable uncertainty likewise surrounds another king from the middle of the Second 
Dynasty who, uniquely ia Egyptian history, chose 10 replace the Horus-tuleoa 
surmounting the serek with the Sethranlmmal, Just why Peribsen chose to break with 
Custom and emphasise the later god is 8 mystery. The change may have had ‘real 
political implications’, perhaps iadicting a new development in he ideology of kingship 
(Hofman 1980-351). Some scholars have seen a connection berwrecn the change of lille 
and two other aspects of Peribsen's reign: his decision 1o be buried in the First Dynasty 
soyal cemetery at Abydos, and the fact that he is not tested by cotempocary 
inseriptioas ouside Upper Egypt. It is possible that Perbsen ruled only in the southern 
part f he country; he may hve bee descended fiom the First Dynasty royal family, 
hence his decision to be buried at Abydos. Altematively, if he was an Upper Egyptian 
usugper, the choice of the Unum cl-Qasb ss his burial place may have bee intended to 
confer legitimacy, by associncion in death with the kings of the First Dynasty. The special 


By aes BE 6 


features of Peribsea's reign easily lend themselves to speculative historical 
ıresonstructions, but cautioa should be exercised. 

To judge from the tomb inseription of Shery, Peribsen's mortuary cult seems 1o have 
been celebrated at Saqqars despite the fact dat his tomb (Pete 1901: pl. LX) and 
funerary enclosure (Ayrton et af 1904-1-5, pl. VII; Kemp 1966; sealings: Ayrton et al 
1904: pl. DX. 2) are located at Abydos, I is 1 the latter sile that Peribsen is best attested. 
"Some of the sealings fron his toenb bear the eplthet in 5 1, ‘uibute (or ‘coaqueror"?) 
of Seet” (Perie 1901: pl. XXILIST). The town determinative afer Setjet seems to 
indicate that the locality lay within Egypt, rather than being the land of SyriacPalestine 
(also called Setjet by the Egyplians). The towa has been plausibly detiried as Sethrot in 
ıe northeastern Delta (Grdelof 1044:295-9), know to have been a cult centre of the 
god Seth in later times. It is possible though not provable, thu the town was tneoqporated 
into the Egyptian realm and a cult of Seth established during the reign of Peribsen. 
However, his would clearly require Peribsen to have ruled Lower Egypt as well as Upper 
Fay 

Tuo funerary stelae were discovered in front of Peribsen's Abydos toh (Fischer 
1961:52, fig. 7: BM 35597: Spencer 1980:16, pls 8-9 [Cal. 151) An official's sealing 
fiom the reign of Peibsen was recently discovered on the island of Elephantine, in the 
ısetlement area north of he Satet temple (Dreyer, la Kaiser ef al 197:107 and 109, 
fig, 13, pl. LSa). The inseription names the ‘sesller) of all the things of Upper Egypt 
sand thus indicates the existence of state administrative structures on Elephanine fro al 
least the lale Second Dynasty (Pûteniek, in Kaiser ef al. 1995:1830), Mastaba KI at Beit 
Khalaf, dated 1o the reign of Netjerikhet, none the less yielded a sealing of Peribsen 
(Garstang 1902: pl. X8). An unprovenaneed cylinder vessel of red limestone is decorated 
wih the serekh of Beribsen in raised selief (Kaplony 1965:24 and 26, fi. 51 [line 
drawing, pl V fg. 51 Iphotograpa]). Curiously, the name of Peribsen also occurs on 
stone vessel fragment found by Petrie in he First Dynasty tomb of Memeith (Peuse 1900: 
pl IV. The only possible explanation is that ie represents later coatamination of he 
tomb contents, pechaps fiom Ammêlineau's excavations 


Sethemlbperenmaat 


“The final king whose identity and place in the succession are uncertain bore he two-part 
name Sekhemibcperenmant. There are wo min hypotheses conceming Sekhemib. 
perenmaat (Quirke 1990:45: frst, that he is one and the same King as Peribsen, in a 
iferent guise (for example, Grdsclofî 104:295; Emery 1961:95; Shaw and Nicholson 
195:220; Dodson 1996-25); second, that he was the successor of Peribsen (Kaplony 
1963; Helck 179:132). For those who hold the first view, he ceeurrence of seslings 
bearing ihe name Sekhemib-perenmant in both the tomb and funerary enclosure of 
Peribsen is significant (Petrie 1901: pl. XXL164-72, and Ayrton er al. 1904: pl. 1X3, 
respectively). Moreover, oa inseribel stone vessel ffagments from the Step Pyramid 
Complex (Lscau and Lauer 1959: pl. 18 nos 87 94), Sekhemib-perenmuat is given he 
epithet iw h ut “trîbute (or ‘conqveror') of foreign land(s)" (Laeau and Lauer 1959: pl 
1 no. 3), remiaiscent of fhe phrase nw S 1. discussed above, which appears on 
ısealings of Peribsen fiom his Abydos tomb, Those who hold the second view point to the 
het hat the senlings form Peribsen's tomb bearing he name of Sekhemib-pesenmaat 


"were found in he entrance, a parallel situation to the sealing of Hetepsekhemwy found in 
he tomb of Qua. On belane, the evidence seems 10 weigh slighlly in favour of 
identifying Sekhenmib-perenmant as the same persan ss Peribsen, perhaps before he made 
he unusual move of adopûng a Seth-name. The similarity of the wo names, Sekhenib- 
ıperenmaat and Peribsen (both include the elements ib and pr, hint at a close connection. 
Apart rons the iastances already cited, the name Sekhemib-perenmant is anested on 4 
sealing from the debris Of he Old Kingdom town st Elephantine (Leclant and Clete 
TS93:250), and on the inside of a unprovenanced alabaster bowl {Kaplony 1965:24, pL 
Vz s2 


Khasethem (uy) 


The last king of the Second Dynasty is an important, and in many ways transitional, 
igure (e1. Hoffman 1980348-54), More is known about his reign than any other of the 
dynasty, and his survîving monuments are by fur he most inpressive of any Early 
Dynastic ruler before Nejerikhet At the beginning of his seign, the last king of the 
Sesand Dynasty adopted the Horus name Khasekhen, ‘the power has appeared. Later, 
however, he added the Selhranimal to the top of his serek, and chunged his name 
accordingly to the dual fom Khasekhemwy, the uo powers have appeared’, together 
i an additioal epithet ay ip irf, “hie two lords are st pence ta him. The new 
name seems consciously o have been modelled oa that of he dynasty’ founder, 
Hetepscklxenmwry. It may therefore have boen iniended 10 peoclaim national renewal under 
Khasekhenmwy (Kaiser 1902:1845, n. 44). It used to be thought that the vo forms of the 
name belonged 1o two different kings (Emery 1961-98): bul it is now generally accepted 
hat they were bome ut different periods by one and the same monarch (for exanmple, 
Quirke 1990:46; Shaw and Nicholson 1995-150) 

1n the carly part of his reign, Khasekhem sects to have shou panieular iaterest in, 
sand revereace for: Hierakonpolis, he ancient Predynastic capital if ie Tar south of he 
country. Indead, Khasekhe is attested only ance ouside Hierakonpolis, on an inscribed 
diocite vessel fron the Step Pyramid complex (Lacau and Lauer 1059: pl. 3 no. 18) 
“Teaverine and granite vessels of Khasekhe were discovered inside the temple of Honus 
wat Hierakonpolis (Quibell 1900: pl. XXXVI) In all cise, the inscription shows he 
godless Nekhbet standing on a ring cootaining the wond ht, ‘rebel’ The accompanying 
Îegend describes the seene as “the year of fighting the northern enemy’. The Horus-falcon 
atop fhe king's serelh wears only the waite crow, associated with Upper Egypt (Quibell 
1900: pl. XXXVI). Unless the scene represents nothing moce thun 3 trsditonal duty of 
kingship or a ritual, 


against the rebellious nord ultimately resulted ia Khasekher's victory, anû he wras ble 
i reunite Egypt. To commemorte this achievement, he changed his hame to dhe dual 
fom, to demcastrale that pesce and harmony had returned through his setions. In the 
absence of hand evidence, his eeonstnuction of events must remain speculative, though it 
does fît he available data well. la particular, two famous seated statues of Khasekhem 
fiom Hierakoapolis, ae of limestone (Quibell 1900: pl. XXXIX), e other of siltstone 
(Quibell 1900: pl. XLI [lef]), carry inseriptions which show defeated enemies in 
contorted positions, labelled as “northern enemies 47.209" (Quibell 1900: pl. XL) These 


Barly ayaa Hap 8 


wo sauces clearly suggest hostile activity undertaken by Khasekhem against û nother 

foe, though a precise Hdenliieation of the enemy is nor possible, lı has been suggested 
shal the gap in the later sources, transmogrifed into the name “Hudjela' by the New 
Kingdom serbes who compiled the Saqqara and Turin King lists, may once have 
contained he name of Khasekhem's ogponent(s), later expunged from the record 
(Dodson 1996:28). If a fragmentary stela Rom Hierakonpolis is to be interpreted at hee 
value, Khasekhen may have preceded his atacks on the north by a canpaiga southwards 
into Nubia The stela fragment shows part of a kneeling captive resting on a platform 
whieh ends in fhe head of a foreigner, This last is surmounted by a bov, the sign used to 
write the name applied to Nubia, Ta-Sety. Moreover, an laserîptioa below the scene gives 
he serekl of Khasekhen and the phrase "humbling the foreign land' (Quîbell and Giren 
1902: pl. LVIID. The other known occurrence of Khusekher's serel is on an 
wmprovenanced copper axe-head in a private collection (Kaplony 1965-24 and 29, fg. 
5 

Under the later version of his name, Khasekhemwy, the king is much more widely 
ıantested, hom Hierkonpolis la the fir scuth of Egypt t0 Byblos en the Lebanese coast A 
ffagment of a breecla stone vessel was recovered from the Egyptian temple area 
Byblos, inelsed wilh the phrase A sh mî dî nl, ‘Khusekhemwy, given life’ 
(Monte 1928-84, fîz. 1) Unusually, the Setd-animal on top of the sere appears to be 
wearing Ihe red crown, whereas the Horus-falcon wears the usval double ctown. This 
vessel may easily have seachel Byblos through trade andlor at a later period. None the 
less, seems ikely that foceign relations resehed a new level under Khasekhemwy, since 
a seakimpression of his seg gives the first occurrence of the tille initrd A 3t 
‘overseer OF foeeign lands)” (Kaplony 1963, IIE: pl 12 fig. 269). I strongly suggests the 
imposition of Egyptian hegemony on foreign territory. This may be confirmed by a 
damaged sone block wilh s list of Greig counties from ‘he temple area at 
Hicrakonpolis (Quibell and Green 1902 pl. XXIII [bogom]) The inseription seems 
originally to have included numerals (some are panially preserved), and may therefore 
have recorded tribute or enemies slain in batle. Other inseriptions of Khaseihemmry have 
been found st Saqqurain private tomb (S3043: Kaplony 1963, 1 163), and in the Step 
Pyramid complex (Fin and Quibell 1935,1141, ig. 22: Lauer 193931, pl. XIXT-S: 
Laeas and Luer 1959: pl. 19 no. 95}_dnd Abydos (Petrie 1901: pls XXIEXXIV; 
Amêlineaı 1902: pls XXI, XXII, Ayrton ef al. 1904:3, pl IX). 

Khasekhemy s mortuary canstrucigns at Abydos are truly imgeessive. In their 
design and symbolism they point the way towards the Step Pyramid complex of 
Negjerikhet a generaion ter. The burial chamber of Khasekhemwy's tomb was lined 
wilh blocks of dressed limestone (Petie 1901: pl. LVIL4-6), representing the largest 
ıseale use of dressed stone 1o that date. His funerary enclosure, known Ioday by is Arabic 
nickname, the Shunet ez-Zebîb, is û mammoth structure of mudeciek (Aymon 1 al. 
1904:15, pl VD. A ‘ec of funerary bouts discovered sdjacent to he enclosure may 
have formed part of the overall building programme (O'Connor 1991, 199). Buildings 
inside the cour of the enclosure foreshadow some of the elements of he Step Pyramid 
complex (Kemp 1989.56, fg. 18; O'Connor 1995-7). The Sthunet ez-Zebîb is sil one of 
he most visible monuments at Abydos, is massively hick walls having withstood forty 
five centuries, Despite its vast size and the investment of labour that it represents, the 
“Shunt ez-Zebb is not the oaly such building arwîbulable to Khasekhemwry. A parallel 


construction can be found on the norlhem side of the Cieeat Wadi at Hierakonpolis (see 
Chapter 7). Why Khusekheiwy should have coastructed Iwo such funerary enclosures 
semains a mystery. ln addition 1o the Tort, a granite door-jamb fro the town site at 
Hierakonpolis amay have beloaged to a temple erected by Khasekhenmwry (Quibell 1900: 
pl Il; Engebach 1034). Two further blocks found nearby (Quîbell and Cîreea 1902: pls 
DIx4, XXI [botom) suggest a major building programme undertaken by 
Khasekhemwry at Hierakoapolis Aeross the river at Elkab, a granite block with the king's 
serekl was discovered wiin the 1w enclosure, hining at another large building (Sayce 
and Clarke 1905230). The Pulermo Stone may provide further evidence for temple 
building, ifthe beginning of the tN register compeises he last years of Khasekhemwy's 
reign. The entry for year 13 records the construction of a stone building called Mr r1 
(Sehûler 190226) The reference to stone probably indicates a temple, since sec 
buildings of the Early Dynastic period were more usually amade tom mudbrick If he 
Early Dyeustic relief Blocks from he temple of Hathor at Ciebelein are also o be dated 1o 
ıe reign of Khasekhermuy (WS. Sith 1949:1378), he would emerge as a major patron 
of temple construction in Upper EYP, and by far the most prolific builder of he Eacly 
Dynastic period as a whole. 

The achievements of Khasekhenmy's reign are not restuicted, however, to architeetate 
ıo adiminisrtion. The objects fom his tomb at Abydos are among the glories of Early 
Dynastic crafsmanship. They include a sceptre fishioncd from the precious sone sar 
wilh bands of gold (Petrie 1901: pl. IX: dolomite limestone vases with sheet gold 
covers (Petrie I901: pl 1X2, 5-10, Spencer 1903-46, fig. 65): and ever and basin of 
bronze (Peuie 1901: pl. IX-13-15; Spencer 199388, fig. 68). Advanced metalvorking is 
so indirectly tested by an entry oa the Palermo Stone. The mujor event of year 1S was 
the fıshioning of a copper sure called ‘high is Khasekhemuy’ (Schafer 190227, Sethe 
1914) Litexsize copper suatues which would It sue a description have survived from the 
late Old Kingdom. The entry for year 15 may also contain a reference to shipbuilding. 
According io the Palermo Stone, the King whose reign is recorded at he beginning of the 
fh sepister died in his sixteenth or seventeenth regnal year. However, oa both he 
staies of Kasekhenn fron Hiceakonpolis the King wears the close-fiting robe associated 
wih he Sel-festival, usually though not alwrays__celebrated after a considerable period 
Oftime onthe throne 

The reign of Khasekhermwy marks a turning point i Egyptian history and culture, 
inking the early development of dyaastie civilisation during he First and Secoad 
Dynasties with the full flourishing of that civilisation from the begining of the Third 
Dynasty. His mormuary constructions foreshadow he pyramid age, and his poliical 
aehievemets seen to have re-established the intemal stability and prosperity needled r 
he great cultural achievements of his suecessoes. A sealing fron Khasekhemwy s tomb 
at Abydos demonstrates the family link between him and Netjerîkhet. The sealing names 
the ‘mother of the King's children, Nimaathap' (Petrie 1901: pl. XXIV.210). This same 
personage is named, this time as mother of the dual king’, on a sealing fron mastaba KI 
î Belt Khallaf (Garstang 1902: pL. X7), dated by other seslings to the reign of 
Nejerikhet In other words, Netjeriklnet was Nimaathap's son, either by a second husband 
or, perhaps more likely (iven he phraseology on the sesling fom Khasekhewy's 
tomb} by Khasekhemy himself. 


Early dni Et 80 


THE THIRD DYNASTY 


The later king lists and the conterporary monuments ate in rare agreement concerning 
he number of Third Dynasty Kings. Both the Abydos King list and the Turin Canon 
second five rulers, whilst five Horus names are attested in Thin Dynasty inscriptions. 
Unfortunately, the history of the dynasty is not without its problems, There remain 
ıdiftieuties n correlating the differen royal names, and the order of the five kings ls ar 
fiom clear, as is he atirîbutioa of the royal funerary monuments at Zawîyet el-Aryan and 
Maidun The archaeological evidence contradicts the Abydos and Turin lists by 
indicating that Nejerkhet succeeded Khasekhemwy direcly. By contmst, the 
archaeological and historical sources agree concerning Nejerikhet’s successor, nou that 
he bır mame Djcserty has been irrefutably linked with the Horus Sekhemkhe, There is 
no doubt thal the King known by his unvt-hily name Hunî was the last ruler of the Third 
Dynasty, but the ordering of the remaining three Horus names (Sanaksl, Khaba andl 
Quhedjel) and ane nswrhiy name (Nebka) is open to diftering reconstructions. The 
duration of the Thin Dynasty is also a matter of conjecture. The figures given for he five 
kings in the Turin Canon tual seventy {our years, a comparatively short period. There is 
no independent means Of checking these figures; we can oaly gauge how likely a 
particular reiga-length is for a particular nuler, given the seale of his monuments or other 
known achievements. The end of the Thind Dynasty has been plausibly placed at 2575 
BC (Baines and Milek 198036) 


Nejerikhet 


Te weight of archaeological evidence favours Netjerikhet as Khasekhemwy's successor 
and thus the first King of the Third Dynsty. The sealinge of Nirmnathap, already 
mentioned, peobsbly indicate that Nejerkhet was Khusekheney's s0. Sealings oF 
Nejerikhet found ia the tomb of Khasekhenmwy at Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. XXIV 211; 
Kaplony 1963, Ile 1187,1190, 11l: figs 168, 798; Giddy 1996.30,1997-29), and further 
examples toon the Shunet ez-Zebib (Newberry 1909: pl. XXI; Kaploay 1063, 1: 164: 

‘pl 131, gs 800-1), suggest hat Netjerikhet, as son and heie, oversaw the burial of 
nis predecessor, Moreover, the architectural and symbolic parallels between the funerary 
enclosure of Khasekhenmwiy (lhe Shunet e2-Zebib) and the Step Pyramid enclosure of 
Nejerikhet argue in favour of the close proximity of the two reigns (O'Connor 1991, 
1995). The same store of cial stone vessels seems to have supplied both kings” tombs, 
ısinee both contained fragments with Identical ink drawings of the god Min, clearly dawn 
fiom the same collection (Petrie 1901: pl. IL48; Lacaw and Laver 1965: pl. 15 1-5. Two 
ıselings fom mastaba KI at Belt Khallaf bear an Hentieal inscription referring to he 
‘house Of provisioning of the vineyads of Memphis except for the saret, which is 
hat of Khasekhemwy in one case (Weill 1908:83) and that of Nejerikhet in the other 
(Weill 1908-101). A plausible conclusion is that, alter the death of Khasekhemmwy, he 
original cylînderseal was simply recut with the name of he new King The 
archaeological evidence is supported by st least one historical source: the Saqqara king 
lis names Djoser (Nejerikhet) as the immediate successor of Beby (a misreading of the 
name Klusekhemwy) (Weill 1908-13). 


Nejerikhet is beter known by the name preserved in the later King lists, Djoter. 
Unfortunately, this name__peesumsbly the King's nb of nswrBily name does not 
appear on any contemporary monument or inscription, and the equation of Djoser and 
Nejerikhet (the King's Horus name) depends on the much luter Sehel Famine Stela 
(Barguet 1953: esp. 14, pl. H1) Since later tradition also revered Djoser as the King for 
whom the Step Pyramid complex was built (Grima! 199265), there can be ao doubt 
about the correciness of the detification. When the New Kingdom seribe drawing up he 
“Turin Canon came 10 the arme of Djoser, he changed the ink tn his pen from blaek to red 
(Gardiner 1959: pl. Il, Malek 198637) By wring the nane of Doser in red ink, he was 
indicating the special place held by that King in the minds of latec generaions of 
Eayptlans, Despite the continuities berwreen the end of the Second and the beginning of 
me Third Dynasty, the scribe was justified in recoeding the accession of 
NegjecikhevDioser a5 a significant milestone in Egyptian history. The King made « 
decisive break wilh ihe past, by abandoning for good the traditional royal burtal ground 
of Abydos in favour of a site overlooking the capital (ef. Shaw and Nicholon 1995:1490) 
This decision is likely to have been made for a variety of reasons, The sebellions in the 
north of the country recorded on the statue bases of Khasekhemm may have been a factor. 
By sing the royal moruary comple ihe preeminent symbol of ceniralised 
authoritycloser to Lower Egypt, the King may have been making a statement about 
fayal control of the nort, If the King now resided permanently at the capital, it would 
have been logical to site he royal tomb nearby. Furthermore, Neyjerikhct may have had 
family ies with the Mermphite area, since Manetho records that the Thind Dynasty kings 
were from Memphis. 

The mortuary complex of Netjerikhet at Saqqara is one of the most impressive 
monuments in the Memphite necropolis (Lauer 1936, 1939). K represents a staggecing 
achievemeat, and rermuins one of the most irnportant sources foc Early DynusGe religion 
and kingship. The name of the king features most prominently oa the six panels from the 
galleries beveath he pyramid and South Tomb (F.D.Fiiedman 1995). Lintels fon he 
false doors framing the inscribed panels give the King's complete tinulary (Firth and 
Quibell 1945, II: pls 16, 39. 43), whilst boundary stelae om he complex are inseribed 
wilh the names of the king and female members of his family (Fin and Quibell 1935, 11 
pl. 87; Porter and Moss 1974407; reconstnucted by Lauer 1936.187, tig. 209). Seal 
impressions with Netjerikhet's sereth have also been found in the galeries beneath the 
Neth Count granaries (Firth and Quibell 1935, E 141, Ags 19-31) and beneath he 
pyramid itself (Lauer 1939:74, pl. XIX), Recently, some unique decorated blocks 
ought 1o derive fom û gteway in the complex have been published (Hawass 1904) 
They feature the king's serekê and a series of recumbent lions, the vhole design framed 
by snakes, 

The dominance of the Step Pyramid complex is something of a mixed blessing for 
ancient hisorlans. Jt certainly highlights he reign of Nejerkhet as a period of steal 
arisic, architectural and administrative innovation, However, it sends to obscure he 
King's oher accomplishments and the evidence for his activities in other parts of EYP 
Only fiagments now survive of a decorted shrine from Heliopolis (WS Smith 
19491133-7, gs 48-53). The scenes in raised relief may be coanected wih he 
celebration Of a Sed-festival andlor with the ennend (assembly of nine gods) worshipped 
wat Heliopolis. Relief blocks Rom the temple of Hathor at Gehelein probably date to the 


Barly dma Hyp S2 


reign of Khusekhemmty; however, it is possible that they date to the beginning of the 
Third Dynasty, if he “arehaic’ style of decoration is due more to the provincial oeigin of 
he work (WS Smith 149:137). Although the royal burial ground at Abydos was 
abundoaed after the death of Khasekhemwy, the region renined a location for high 
‘satus burials into the Third Dynasty, Mastaba KI at Bel Khalaf (Garstang 1902) dırarfs 
even he Abydos and Hierakonpolis enclosures of Khasekhemwy. It yielded a large 
umber of seal-impressions, most of therm dating to the reign of Netjcrikhet, including the 
‘Sealing of Queen Nimaathap discussed above. One possibility is that mastaha KI was her 
ioenb. Other tombs were bull, at Beit Khalaf during The reign of Nejerîthel, though none 
of them equals KI i size. A sealing of Netjerikhet was found in each of the mastabas 
K2, K3, K aad KS (Garstang 1902). These monuments may have belonged 1o minor 
members of Nimaathap's family, pethaps the descendants of the First Dyoasly royal 
family who stîl exercised local authority ss govemors of the Thinite region. The only 
other site within Egypt where Nejerikhet is anested is Elephuntine. Four jarsealings 
have been excavated fom the easter area of the town (Dreyex, in Kaiser et al. 1987-108 
wand 109, fig. 13c, pl 15e). Esch bears the King's serek; one gives the tiles of an oficial 
'coatrolier of the cellar and assistant ia he magazine of provisions. .of Upper and Lowe: 
Egy, follower of the King every day’. A further sealing has been found moce recently ia 
he Old Kingdom debris of the easiem and souhem sectors of the town (Leclant and 
lere 1993-250) At Saqqara, sealings of Netjerikhet have been found in three ite, 
private tombs (S2405 and S3518: Porter and Moss 1974437, 448, respectively, Emery 
TO70:10, pl. XVILE Cı T-Marin 1919:18, pl. 1.5, including the tab of Hesir (Quibell 
1913:3, pl. XXVIIL23), famous for its carved wooden panel 

By ar he most significant development of Nejerikhe's reign, aside tom the 
construction of his mortuary complex, was the instigation of regular Egyptian activity in 
he Wadi Maghura, the turquoise mining ares of the south-western Sinal Whilst there is 
evidence for sporadic Egyptian ivoNement in the Sinai fom Predynastie times, 
centrally organised expeditions to exploit he area's mineral seserves, attested by rock cul 
inscriptions, apparently began oaly in the early Third Dynasty (Gardiner and Peet 1952, 
1955). It is possible that the administrative sophistication required to mount such long: 
distance enterprises was only developed as 3 result of the pyrumid-buflding activity 
which characlerised the Third Dyaasty. Alternatively, state-sponsored activities outside 
the boundaries of Egypt proper may hive been impossible during much of the Second 
Dynasty when he country seems to have been riven by tatermal tensions. 

The Turia Canon gives Djoser a seign of just nineteen years. This seems rather brief, 
given he achievements of his reign. However, the Step Pyramid complex was lef 
nfînkshed, and it is likely that the king died before his grand projet could be completa 


Selhemlhe 


For once, the archaeological evidence and all the later king lists agree on the identity of 
Negjecikhet's successor (Figure 3.5). His Horus name was Sekhemmkhel, his name given in 
ihe king lists, Djeserty. The correspondence of he two names was proven by the 
discovery of an Ivory plaque in Sekhemkhet's step pyramid complex (Goneim 1957: pls 
LXV:B, LXV). The plaque was engraved with the inseription aby sri 


HELD S4 
2 4 AIRY 


Figure 3.5 The Third Dynasty: a problem solved. A 
rare example of textual and archacological 
sources in agreement: (1) cartouches of 
Djoser (Negjerikhet) and his successor 
“Djoserteti’ from the king list in the tomb 
of Tjuneroy at Saqqara (aller Gardiner, 
1961: fig. $; (2) corresponding entries 
from the Turin Royal Canon, naming 
Djoser's successor as ‘Djoserty' (aher 
Gardiner 1959: pl II); (3) the royal name 
from an inseribed ivory plaque found in 
the unfinished step pyramid complex of 
Sekhemkhet at Saqqara, giving the king's 
“Two Ladies’ name Djesertî)-ankh and 
thus confirming the identification of 
Sekhemkhet as Netjerikhet's immediate 
successor (after Goncim 1957: pl. LXVI), 
Notte same scale. 


The king's mortuary complex is the principal monument 1o have survived from his reign 
(Goneim 1957) It seems that Inhotep, chancellor under Nejerikhct and fibled as the 
architect of his Step Pyramid complex, slso had a hand in Sekhenkhet's mortuary 
complex: a graffito on the norte enclosure wall of he Sekhemkhet cormplex names 
Imhotep (CGoncim 19574, pl. XID, although he context is unclear. The high quality of 


Early dynastic Ep St 


workmanship in Sekhemkhet's reign is eloquently attested by finds fromm his pyramid 
enclosure, particularly the set of gold jewelery discovered in the main comidor of the 
ısbstrueture (Goncin 1957: pls XXXIXXXI Au. 

Sekhekhet continued the programme of expeditions to the Wadi Maghara instinuted 
by his predecessor, A. tock-eut imseription oa 1 cli above the valley shows the King 
siting » Bedouin captive (Gardiner and Peet 1952: pl D. (This inseciption was once 
anributed to the First Dynasty King of a similar name, Semerkhet) A seal-impression 
bearing he name of Sekherakhet has been discovered recently in the Old Kingdon town 
wat Elephantine (Leclant and Clere 1903-250; Pitznick, in Kaiser et al 1995:1831 and 182, 
fig. 2u: Seidlmayer 1906: 113). The sealing gives the ûtles of an official who was both 
‘overseer of Elephuntine’ and ‘sealer of gold of Flephantine', The seal repceseats the 
earliest know occurrence of he town's name (Egyptian 3w) (Seidlmayer 19960: 113). 

"The Turin Canon assigns Djoser's successor a reign of just six yers. Given the 
unînkthed nature of Sekhenkhet's step pyramid complex — presumably the major 
construction projet of his reise _and the paucity of other monuments dated to his feign, 
his gure seems reasonable (cf Gocdicke 19M). 


Kaba 


The Horus Khaba is arteted st four, perhaps five, siies in Eaypt Eight sione bowls from 
a higvstatus mastaba at Zaviyet el-Aryan (Z500) in the Memphite necropolis are 
inscribed with the king's serek (Arkell 1956; Kaplony 1965:27, pl. VI, fg. 57: Dunham 
1978:34, pls XXV-XXVI The mastaba is located in a cemetery adjacent to the socalled 
‘layer pyramid’, an unfinished royal mortuary complex of the lute Thin Dynasty 
(Dunham 197€). There is no evidence from the pyramid itself to lnk it with Khaba, but it 
is generally atributel 1o hin oa the basis of the inscribed stone bowls found nearby (ef 
“Stadelmnann 1984496 Edvrands 1993:64), 


1n Upper Egypt, the name of Khaba has been found on sealings from Hierakonpolis andi 
Eleplhuarine (Figure %6) The Hierakoapolis sealing came froan the Eurly Dynastic town, 
seiiher from houses or fron the Early Dynastic strafum under he Old Kingdon temple of 
Horus (Quîbell and Geeen 1902: pl. LXX.1). The Elpkantine sealing was excavated 
ion the caster 1u, and shows 4 divine figure (possibly the god Ash, comnectad with 
soyal estates) holding a long sceptre, flanked by serelis of Kkaba (Dreyer, in Kaiser ef 
dal 1987-108 and 109, fîz. 13.b, pl. 1518). The inseriptioa on the other side Of the sealing 
is almost illegible, but does include the ttle Kft . ‘mayor’, one of the earliest 
references 1 his office. The sereth of Khaba is also inscribed on an unprovenanced 
diocite bow in London's Petrie Museum (Arkell 1056) and oa another diorite bowl in » 
private collection, said 1o have comme fiom Dahshur (Arkell 1958). 


Figure 3.6 Ephemeral rulers, 2: Khaba. Sealings with 
the king's serekh: (1) from the early town 
at Hierakonpolis (after Quibell and Green 
1902: pl. LXX.1): (2) rom the carly town 
at Elcphantine (after Dreyer, in Kaiser ef 
al. 1987-109, fig. 13b). 


We must admit that nexî to nothing is know for certain about he reign of Khaba. His 
swe and nh, names are unknown, Even his position witin the order of succession 
has not been established beyond doubt, hough he clearly reigned in the later part of the 
Third Dynasty. Many scholacs ideatty him as the penultimate King of the dynasty (or 
example, Baines and Mlek 1980:36), though it has been suggested that Khaba was he 
Horus mime of he last king, better known as Hunî (Studclmann 1984.496). This is 
because stone bowls incised with the name of a king are common in the First and carly 
Second Dynasties but, otherwise, are not atested again until the reign of Snefenı. This 
ends 10 suggest that Khaba preceded Sneferu by only a short period. Moreover, he 
ısealings of Khaba come fron two sites where Hunî erected stmall step pyramids. The 
coincidence of the Kkaba selings and these monuments suggests at least the possibility 
that Khaba and Hunî were one and the same King. None fhe less, the general consensus 
identilîes Khaba as one of Huni's predecessors. In view of the evidence, discussed below, 
for the position of Sanakht within the Third Dynasty, and the close architectural 
similarity between Sekhemkhe's unfinished pyramid and the one al Zaviyet el-Aryan, 


Far dati Ep 86 


Kaba may be most plausibly identified as Sekhekher's immediate successor, and thus 
he third king of the dynasty 


"Sanath and Nebta 


The position of these two names in the onder of suecession remains to be fimnly 
established (Seidlnmayer 1996s: 198, n. 14). With a single exception, Sanakht is atested 
on contemporary monuments by his Horus name. His other names are not known OF 
certain, although a frugmentary sealing fron mastaha K? at Beit Khullaf shows the king's 
serek facing the lower pocion of 3 cartouche (Garstang 1902 pl. XIX.7: Seidlmayer 
1906b: pl. 23). Sinee the sign in the bottom of the cartouche resembles an archaic La- 
sign, the name has been restora as Nebka, and this has been taken as the aswf-Îy name 
of the Horus Sanakht The fact that fhe rwt-hûy name writen in a cartouche did not 
come into regular use until the late Third Dynasty clearly argves in favour of Sanakht 
having reigned towards the end of the dynasty. Although the Abydos and Turin king lists 
record a King Nebkı at the beginning of the Third Dynasty, benveen Khasekhemwy and 
Netjerikhet this is contradicted by the archaeological evidence. 

"A umber of further sealings from mastaba KZ st Beit Khallaf bear the Horus name of 
Sanaklr (Garstang 1902: pl. XIX. 2-6, $). A seakimpression with the king's name was 
found in an Early Dynastic building oh the island of Elephantine (Seidimayer, in Kaiser 
er al. 1982303-6 and 304, fig. 15, pl 65b; Pitnick, in Kaiser er al, 1995.180; 
‘Seidlmayer 196b: 121). The sealing gives a string of tiles, translated as ‘royal seal. 
bearer and judicial official connected with the royal estate’. The inscription suggests that 

sdıministrative building connected 1o a soyal domaln or estate was cece located on the 
island, tached to the small step pyramid nearby. This monument, one of several similar 
iruetures throughout Egypt, ha been dated t0 the last reign of the Third Dynasty 
(Seidlmayer 1996, 106b: 119-20). For this season, the Elephantine sealing tends to 
favour a date for Sanakht 1owards the end of the dynasty. Seakimpeessions of Sanaklt 
fiom the Step Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet (Firth and Quibell 135:141, fig. 18, 
Lauer 1936:5, fg. 3) do not help 1o resolve Sanakl's place in the Third Dynasty since 
hey were found in a room in the northeast comer of the North Temple, a structure whieh 
post dates the Slep Pyramid itsell, lo the absence Of any direct evidence t0 ink the so- 
Called "erick pyramid at Abu Rawash with Sanakht (Dodson 1996:30, after Swelins), it 
must be sûmikiel that no royal tomb can be assigned 1o his king. Although itis perhaps 
unlikely that Sanakht would have failed 1o start work on a funerary monument, it is 
posible that a fundamental reorganisrion of eeonomic and administrative struetwes in 
he late Third Dynasty disrupısd temporarily the sequence of imposing royal tombs 
(Seidlmayer 1996: 210-12) 

‘The most significant monument attributable without doubt to the rei of Sanaldlt is a 
pair of mekeut inscriptions in the Wadi Magbura, Sinai (Gardiner and Pect 1952. pls 1, 
IV). One scene shows the King wearing the while crown, preceded by the standard of 
Wepwrawet and a shrine surmounted by a. falcon. In the other scene (BM 601: Spencer 
1980:16, pls &-9 [Cat. 18], 1993-101, fg 77), the king wears the rel crown and is shown 
in he pose of smiling a captive (now lost. A fragment of vertical inscription 
accompanying the scene contains the oldest known reference 1o turquoise (t3) 
making cleur the reason for the Egyptians interest in the region. 


The combination of sealiags in mastaba K2 at Beit Khalaf suggests that Sanaklht 
succeeded Nejerikhet (Sethe, in Garstang 1902.25) However, It seems certaia that 
Negjerikhet's immediate suceessor was Sekhenkhet, builder of ihe seeoad step pyramid 
complex st Saqqara Sanikht may therefore have been Nejerikhet's second successor, 
and he has been identified as such by s number of scholars (for example, Helck 1984a: 
5). IEthis theary is correct, hen the rock-cut inscriptions in the Wadi Mahar would 
have bee made ln three successive reigns, marking 8 period of intense Egyptian activity 
in he turquoise mining region In the Turin Canon, Djeseqy!Sekhemkher's successor is 
named as Hudjefs; bu, rather han being a name, this word probably indicates no more 
‘han a gap ia fhe records Rom whieh the list was compiled (Goedieke 19564). Given he 
epigraphy of he Beit Khalaf sealing, Sanakht was probably Huns immediate 
predecessor, and hus the penuinate king of the dynasty. An unnamed king in this 
position is given just six years by the Turin Canon. This figure seems quite plausible, in 
ew of the fact that Sanakht is s0 sparsely attested. 

On the basis of the Beit Khalaf seal-impression, Sanakht is almost certainly to be 
ideilîed with the King whose anet-hiy name, weiten in a cartouche, was Nebka 
(Seidlmayer 1996; 121, pl. 23), Nebka is atesteld only indirectly: in the lob of a lute 
Third Dynasty priest al Saqqara (Weill 1908262-73, pls VLVIl: Porter and Moss 
1974:50) and in the Middle Kingdom Tales of Wonder’ preserved in Papyrus Wester 
(Erman 1890:7) The earlier reference occurs in the autobiographical inseriptioe rom he 
toanb of Akhetaa, an official iho, amongst ohcr positions, was ‘priest of King Nebka’ 
The position of Nebka within the Thin Dynasty depends upon the precise iaterpretalioa 
of Akhetaaîs Hile. If he was a priest serving the cult of he reigning king, then Nebka 
must be placed at the end of the Third Dynsty. However, if Akhetaa ras 3 priest ia he 
mortuary cult of Nebka, this king would probably have reigned somewhat carlice in the 
dynasty, The reference 1o Nebka in Papyrus Westcar may help to resolve the problem 
The lale of wonder set in is reign comes afer the tale set in the reign of 
NejerikhevDjoser and before a tale set in the reign of Hun. If the order of he tales is 
chronological then, as suggested here, Nebka will have reigned afer Neğjerikhet and 
preceded Huni on the throne. The Turin Canoa places a King Nebka with a reign of 
nineleea years before Netjerikhet, but this is fatly contradicted by the archaeological 
evidence. The conclusion must be hat Nebka reigned towards the end of he Third 
Dynasty, and this agrees with the available evidence Tor Sanakh. 


Hun and Quhedjet 


Wath the last king of the Third Dynasty, we stınd on the threshold of the Old Kingdom 
Just as the reign OF Khasekhenmy at {hc eni of the Second Dynasty marks something of 
ıa urming-polat so docs the reign of Hunî st he end of the Third Dynusty. Substantial 
Constuetian projects and the possible restructuring of regional administration pave the 
way for the frenzy of pyramid building charıcterisic of the Fourth Dynasty. However, 
ıe sll know comparatively lirle about the king who presided over these achievemens. 
The Turin Canon tecocds a reign-length of twenty-four years for Huni. A shorter reign 
would seem unlikely, given the scale of his completed building projects. 

Hunî is anested on contemporay monuments by his unvfhiy name, writen in a 
cartouche. Altemative readings have been suggested (for example, Cioedieke 1956): but 


Early danse Hyp S8 


in the absence of an agreed transliteration, the name recorded in the later king list, 
Hani, has been adopted by Egy ptologists, evea though i probably represents a cocruption 
ofthe original. Huni's position as last king of he Third Dynasty and Snefen's immediate 
predecessor is confirmed both by Papyrus Prisse (léquier 1911: Ciardiner 1946) and by 
he autobiographical inscription in the tomb of Meğen st Sqqara (Goedieke 1966) 

The most inpcessive monument which can be utributed to Hunî directly is the small 
uate step pyramid on the island of Elephantine, This is now recognised as he 
provenance OF a granite cone, bearing the inscription sf Hunt ‘Diadem of Hunî’, 
followed by the deteeminative Of a palace. The cone suggests that Hun bulk a palace oF 
building associated with {he royal cult on the island (Seidimayer 1996, 19960). Other 
ısmall step pyramids, similar ia size and construction 1o he Elephantine monument, have 
been deified at ses throughour Egypt (Dreyer and Kaiser ISRO; Edwards 1993 Sela 
in the Fayum (Lesko 1988: Zawiyet el-Meiun in Middle Egypt; south Abydos (Dreyer 
and Swelim 1982); Tukh near Naqada; eKula near Hierakonpalis; und south Edf. On 
he basis of the Elephantine monument, all but the Seila pyramid have been dated to the 
‘reign of Huni; excavations have shown that the Seila pyramid was built by his suecessot, 
Snefenı (Edwards 193:60) The function of the small step pyramids has been hotly 
debuted {Seidlmayer 19962). 1t is probable that stone was reserved for royal building 
projects at his period, and the pyramids may have served as territorial markers, perhaps 
ssociated vith cult places of the King or royal estates (there was an administrative 
building attached to the pyramid at Elephantine). The distribution of the monuments 
suggests That there was one pyramid for ech nome, at least in southern Upper Egypt: and 
Ji ıs tempting to link their construction with the reorganisation of provincial government 
posted for Hunî's reign 

The pyramid at Maidum has been attributed to Huni, despite Middle and New 
Kingdon graffi fom the site which credit Snefens wit its construction. If is possible 

lat Sneferı oly finished the monument, coavering it imo a rue pyramid (but note 
Edwards 1903:93). Ifthe initial stage of the Maiduns pyramid was not intended as Huns 
funerary monument the location of his tomb remains a mystery. lt may have been at 
‘Saqqara, but the caly obvious Iocation__the unexcavated Pahholep enclosure 10 the West 
of the Netjerikher complex__laeks any substructure, making it highly unlikely that it 
fepeeseats an unfinished step pyramid cotplex, One suggestion is that the construction of 
ıa series of small step pyramids may, in some way, have lessened the importance attached 
to the principal royal ssonument, he king's tomb. According to this view, he absence of 
a pyramid securely dutable to the reign of Hunî may be no coincidence (Seidlmayer 
‘Téa: 210-11). A estate of Hunî i listed on the Palermo Stone in the reign of the Fi 
Dynasty King Neferirkara (Selîfer 1902.40); this indictes that the memory of Hunî was 

j revered, and at least one of his foundations still in existence, a century-and-a-hall 
after his deuil 

Unîl some thirty years ago, the four Horus names discussed above (Nejerikhet 
‘Sekhenkhet, Sanakht and Khaba) were the oaly ones attested on monuments of he Third 
Dynasty. Then, in the late 1960s, an unprovenanced limestone stela wras purchased by the 
Louvre, inscribed for a king with the previously unkown Horus name Qahedjet (Vanier 
1968) The iconography of the stela is of great significance for Egyptian art histocy, since 
it shows the earliest representation of 3 god (in this case Horus) embracing the king. The 
syle ie very reminiscent of the relief punels fiom the Step Pyramid of Nejerikhet; oa 


sise grounds, therefore, the tela may be placed close in time lo the reign of 
Negjerikhet, However, 1he execution of the carving is superior 1o he Nejecithet relief 
panels, and the more developed iconography of the Qahedjct sielı tens to favour a date 
oran he end of the Third Dynasty The precise identification of he Horus Qahedjet is 
impossible without further epigraphic evidence, but the seholar wtho published the Louvre 
sela vous Hunî in preference to the shadowy Nebka (especially if he later is equuted 
wih he Horus Sanakh), 

‘Irespective of whether the Qahedjct stela was carved for Hunî o¢ for one of his 
predecessors, the achievements of Huni's reign are impressive, and clearly set the scene 
fr the great fiourishing of Egyptian court culture in the Old Kingdom. The structure of 
provincial govemment recorded in the tomb of Meğen probably marks a decisive break 
hom the Early Dynastic past, and presages the absolute ceatral control of rmanpower and 
resources reflected in the pyramid building of the Fourth Dynasty. Thus, with the reign of 
Hunî, the formative period of Egyptian civilisation comes to an end. 


PART II 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF 
AUTHORITY 


CHAPTER FOUR 
ADMINISTRATION 


INTRODUCTION 


Am analysis of Early Dynastic administration highlights he achievement of Egypt's carly 
kings in fashioning a sytem of rule that was to survive for three thousand years. The 
word ‘administraĞan” can be used in wo senses: the entirety of the stale apparatus Of 
govemment, and Ihe more detailed system Of recording and distribution ensployed by it 
(Husson and Valbelle 190244) This chapter will seek to investigate both aspects, 
presenting the evidence for the various iasitutions of government, thelr organisation, 
operations and personel. The section at the end of the chapter gives outlines of some 
individual careers of Early Dynastic high officials, n order to illustrite the possiblities of 
advancement within the raks of the government. 

While several authocs have writen about {he administrative apparatus of the Old 
Kingdom and later periods (for exanple, Helek 1954; Strudwiek 1985), to date “no 
ısystemuie analysis of the politieal organization of the Early Dynastic period has yer been 
anempted' (Tigger e1 al 1983:56) There ace several reasons for this, peimarily the 
difficulties ia deciphering the earliest stage of he Egyptian seript (Kahl 1894), coupled 
with the pauelty and imbalance of the available evidence. Important contributions have 
been amude to our understanding of carly seal-impressions and the institutions and offices 
1o which they refer (Kaplony 1963); autobiographical tomb inscriptions fon the lte 
Third Dyeusty have likewise been analyse, shedding light on admiaistrative 
organisation at the eal of the Early Dynastic period (Junker 1939; Gioedicke 1966, and 
individual studies have examined the origins of particular administrative mechanisms, 
ısuch as phyles (Roth 1991) and the nome systerm (Martin-Pardey 1976). But it seems no 
anempt has been made to combine all the evidence ftom the first throe dynasties in & 
coherent aceount of the carly development of Egyptian administration. As we shall set, 
the evidence is patchy and partial but the administration iself may not have bee 
thorough or all-embracing (Malek 1986:35). By taking sn inclusive appecach to al the 
potential sources, something of the nature of Early Dynastic government, is structure and 
priorities, can be discerned. This is an important goal, for it was under the kings of the 
frst three dynasties that the adeninisrative mechanisıts that were to characterise he Old 
Kingdom were fit developed. The solutioas adopted by Egype's early rulers to the 
problems of poliical and eeanomie control laid the Foundations for the goverment 
hpparatıs of he mature Egyptian stat 


Tle source materlal and lu lmliations 


Any investigation into the structure of he Early Dynastic administration depends to a 
geal extent upon he numerous sealkirmpressions seeovered from royal and private torbe 
of the period. For the Fist Dynasty, these are supplemented by inscribed labels_of 
wood, bone O ivory originally attached 1o various commodities, Prive stele fromm 
First Dynasty graves at Abydos and Saqqara record fhe oceasional oficial tile, or longer 


sequences of titles in the case of two stelae from the reign of Qua. Many of the stone 
Vessels found beneath he Step Pyramid bear incised or painted iascriptioas which convey 
significant information about administrutive aetivities. The majority of he iaseribed 
Yessels ave been plausibly dated 10 the Second Dynasty, hence plugging what otherwise 
would be a serious gap in the evidence for early administration. From fhe very end of the 
“Third Dynasty, the tomb inscriptions of Metjen, Akhetas and Pehemefer provide detailed 
accounts of he careers of three professional administrators, 

‘Alhough the different categories of source material span most of the Early Dynastic 
period, Ihey are very uneven and give only partial insights into the administrative 
Apparatus of he fist three dynasties (Malek 1986:35), Sel-immpressions are an invaluable 
source of information about carly Egypt. Indeed, without un analysis of the inseriptions 
hey provide, no comprehensive history of the Early Dynastic period could be writen 
(Kaplony 1963, I. 3), Nevertheless, they provide only a partial glimpse of government 
aeivities, Sealimpeessions represent the surviving physical traets of administrative acis 
invoking officials of the central government, so it is not surprising that indications of 
provincial administration are almost entirely lacking (Martin-Pardey 1976,34). Instead, 
he sealkimpressioas from royal and dite tombs are primarily concemed with he 
provisioning ofthe tomb in questioa. Hence, most ofthe tiles peeserved on these sealings 
efe to he administration of royal cstutes and foundations (Martin-Pardey 1916:35) 
hich provided he income for malataining mortuury cults, in the orm of agrieulural 
produce and of he various departments of the royal treasury, which was 1he ceotal 
heinution responsible for collecting and sedisuibuting such produce. Much can be 
leamed about he development and administration of economic institutions during the 
course of the first two dynasties; but sealkimpressions affosd almost no information about 
oer branches of the administntion. We are largely ignorant about the carly 
development of the mechanisms of political (as opposed 1o economic) control (Trigger ef 
ual. 1983:56) In particular, the surviving sources tell us nothing about military control, the 
specifically esereive fee ot political aulhority which was aa iomparant aspeet of 
Egyptian government in later periods (ef O'Connor, in Trigger ef al 1983215) As we 
shall see ia Chapter 6, the iconography of carly Kingship stressed the coercive power Of 
he ruler. Moreover, he message of carly royal artefacts such as the Scorpion macehead 
seems 1 have been directed as much iowards the subject population of Egypt (F30) 36 
he king's foreign enemies. We may infer that the authoity of the Early Dynastic state 
was bolstered by a degree of military might, but in the absence of any coatenpocary 
evidence his must remain no more than an educate goes. 

The source material changes murkedly in the Third Dynasty, Very few seal 
impressions have survived from tombs constructed after the reign of Nejerikhet. The 
practice of fumishing burials vith large numbers of sealed commodities seems to have 
died out early is the Third Dynasty. Instead, a tons was provided with an oferîng-stela 
depicting the hers considered necessary to sustain the deceased in the afterlife, Tombs of 
high officials begun 1o be inscribed with biographical texts, several of which, from the 
end of the Third Dynasty, illuminate both economic and provincial administration. The 
private stelae of the Early Dynastic period usually bear few titles. Exceptions are two 
else Hom he reign of Qa, inscribed for the high officials Sabet and Merka, which 
preserve a range of tiles associated with the court. Taken together with occasional 
eferences on seal impressions, these sielae provide much of our iaformration about the 


Barly dma Hap O4 


suet of the royal household, The inserîbed stone vessels from beneath the Step 
Pyramid compeise a rieh and varisd source of Early Dynastic titles, ineluding religious, 
administrative and economic offices, Because they dale mostly fiom the Second and 
Third Dynasties, they cannot be used reliably 1o iuminate the wockings of he 
administration in earlier peciods, This is a general problem with he souree material for 
Early Dynastic administration: although he evidence as a whole covers many branches of 
govemment, ihe chronological spread is very uneven, making general ends in 
administrative development dificult to deduce. The following picture of he 
administration over the whole course of the Early Dynastic period therefore relies on 4 
certain amout of extrapolation and informed gesswotk, based upon the frugments of 
information available. 


Origins 


Some time around 3100 BC, Egyptians found theselves under the control of a single, 
united government, presided over by a King claiming diviae auhority. The various 
poliical groupings of he Predynastic period had coalesced during he period of stale 
formation, leaving the ruler of This as king of the Two Lands. Administration ras now 
conducted on a national seule, bringing wilh it advantages a; well as coastraits, The 
burden of taxation imposed by the court may have exceeded that levied by provincial 
sales, and corvée labour for royal building projects amay have made increasing demands 
ıo the rural population. Bur in retum, a centralised adinisteution provided a stabilising 
influence and, critically, a guarantee Of emergency relief in ûimes of famine through the 
ımaiatenance OF ceneral socks of grain (O'Connor 1972.99). 

‘Though the impact of political decisions was now felt countrywide, the existence of a 
buremueratic apparatus Was by no means a new phenomenon. The inveation of weiing in 
he late Predyistic period was undoubtedly a result of the need for detailed accounting 
and record-keeping (Postgate et al. 1995), as the courts of Upper Egypt inensiied theif 
iavohement in specialised eraft production and foreign trade. The continuities between 
lute Predynastie and Early Dynastic Egypt in ofher splaeres__such as materlal culture and 
kingship ideology make it ikely hat at least some of the institutions of he Early 
Dynastic administration were iaherited {Rol 1991:1-2). Indeed, the sealings om 
Abydos lomb B2 and the accompanying pir BO which mearion the office of bî (Kaiser 
and Dreyer 1982231 fg. 9; Dreyer 1 al. 1996:49) _coanected with managing he 
produce of royal domains—indice that some of the characteristics of Early Dynastic 
ministration were already in existence iovards the end of he Predynastic period. 

1i has been suggested that the system of goverment, during the firt two dynasties at 
least, ‘kept many of iss Prelynastic trappings’ (Holman 180348). In particular, the 
composition of the court—the highest officials surrounding the king is likely to have 
been bused on family ties and bonds of Kinship (Honan 1980.325), selecting the social 
organisuion of he lale Predynastic period (Rol 1991-216) However, it must be 
admiral that there is Hile explicit evidence for the operation of a strongly Kinship-base 
system in ancient Egypt The mortuary record of the late Predypnastic period suggests a 
Society which sras already highly structured (though not necessarily along kinship lines} 
and he evidence for kinship as a major factor in the government of Early Dynastic Egypt 
is largely architectueal: the use of ‘palace Reade” decoration on the tombs of high 


omîcials at North Saqqara. It is generally assumed that in the First Dynasty many, if not 
sall of he most senior sdmiaistatoes were royal relatives, but This cannot be tablished 
bejond doubt 

The reign of Netjerîkhet at the beginning of the Third Dynasty appears to have been 
marked by the establishment of a mote structured administration, conpeising different 
depanments each with its own bureauerscy. For the fist time, all the beanches of 
goverment may have been brought together in one lccatioa, at Menmphis (Helek 
954:132). The eforms may have been designed to improve eflicieney, not least in he 
area of levying taxation. An efficient bureaucracy and an uniatemupted Now of income 
inte govemment coffers would certainly have been pre-requisites for the construction of 
he king's Step Pyramid complex which represented an unprecedenedl mobilisation of 
manpower and resources, The administrative changes brought about at is time are 
feflected, above all, in the appearance of the office of vizier. The vizier ras in charge of 
he eatire apparatus of government and was personally responsible to he king. To 
indicate his rank, fhe vizier adopted old courly tiles sueh as rrp £ ladeed, ites which, 
din earlier periods, had distinguished the officials in he personal service of the King now 
became mere ranking tiles. 


Te prioriies of Early Dynastic odeninistrarion 


1f we follow the moder assumption that all states are motivated, if not by self-interest 
hen at least by an institutional iostinet for selEsurvival, snd apply this to the easly 
Egyptian slate, the priorities of Early Dynastic administration become clearet, As We 
have seen in Chapter 2 the very proccss of state formation seems to have been driven__dt 
east in part > by the desire, on the part of Upper Egypt's rulers, to gain and then conteol 
access 10 trade routes wilh lands to the north and sulk, Prestige commodities Roms Syria. 
Palestine and, 10 a lesser extent, from Nubia_were not simply coveted by he 
princelings of Upper Egypl, they wete necessary for the conspicuous consurmpioa which 
proclaimed and maintained the power of the ruling @ltes. t seems to have been Lower 
Egypt's close contacts with the Near East, coupled perhaps wih is abundant and ferile 
agricultural land, that made it the object of Upper Egyptian expansionism during the 
period of sale formation. Once he rulers of the Thinite region had established 
‘hemselves as sovereigns of the entire country reigning as Kings of the First Dynasty 
heir priorities need not have changed dramatically. With the trade networks and 
economic sesourezs of the whole of Egypt nov st heir command, the opportunities of 
conspicuous consumption were greater Than ever. The central theme of this book is the 
supreme achievement of Egypt's early rulers in creating mechanisms of rule which were 
o survive, virtually unchanged, for the next three thousand years. These mechanisms > 
economic, political and ideological enabled the King and his court to go on doing what 
hey had Jone befoce the unification of Egypt exercising authority and commissioning 
grandiose projects 1o emphusîse that authority, At its most besic level, poliieal power 
depends upon economic control. A guaranteed income ftom taxation is als a peerequiskte 
for supporting specialist craftsmen and underaling major construction prajces. The 
economy, then, emefges as Ihe central concern of the Early Dynastic aûnninistruion, Or 
ıwihout adequnte command of Egyps economie resources, the state simply could not 
funegon, Hence, the annals make frequent reference 1o surveys of Egypl's resources, 


Bucy dati E 96 


human, agricultural and mineral. An entry fromm the reign of Den apparently seconds a 
census of Egypt's population, and a regular occurrence fron the carly Second Dynasty 
onwanls was the biennial catlexcount (u. This operation would probably have 
recorded all the details of Egypt's agrieulkural base, including the size and location of 
herds, he productive capacity of fields, and so forth, A later entıy on the Pılenme Stone 
indicates 3 more general sssessment of the eunuy's wealth, refering as it does to the 
‘census of gold and fields. Government concern for economic matters is reflected in the 
detailed records that were kept of the height of the annual inundation, a factor which had 
ıa direet impact on agricultural yields. From the reign of Djer, nearly every year in he 
Annals secords this measurement in cubits, pals and fingers. 

“The following analysis of Early Dynastic administration is divided into three sections 
for convenience, although all three spheres of activity are closely interrelated. As the 
driving force behind all adiministntive effort, the economy and the mechanisms 
employed to control it are examined first, The second section considers the activities of 
the court which were funded by taxation of Egypt's sconomic resourees. In a way, 
economic management was simply a means 1o an end The end was the ability to mouni 
impressive peojecls 1o glory the King and maintain the status of hose around him. 
Inevitably, close control of he economy on a natioaal seale required a regional approach. 
The administrative mechanisms introluced by the early state to exploit Egyp's resources 
and facilitate efficient taxation led 1o the development of 3 system of regional 
administration. A various periods of Egyptian histocy, when the power of the central 
govemment waned and the influence of the regions increased correspondingly, the 
administrative divisions iımposed upon the country by its early rulers were transformed 
ite political divisions. The Early Dyrastie origins of provineal sdminiteation are thus 
of great importance for the ter history of Egypt Moreover, they iilastrate how the self. 
inerested ambitions of the court were translated into mechanisms of authority whieh 
were to characterise pharsonic civilisation. 


Persommel 


Te word ‘bureaucracy’ has modem connotations of unnecessary complexity and 
overstallîng, I is not, perhaps, an altogether inappropriute term to describe ancient 
Egyptian administration, since {he indieutions are hat the goverment apparatus was 
muli-faetted and employed large numbers of people, even in the Early Dynastic period. 
The highest officeholders were probably soyal Kinsmen and members of the ruling lite; 
hep (Malek 186-35). The lower ranks would have been open to persons of non-royal 
bith, though it is to be expected that many of he lending families of he Predyeustic 
period retained some degree of influence in govemment, even after he unification of 
Fypt (Kemp, persoaal communication). The massive Early Dynastic necropolis at 
Helvan—which served as the burial ground for all but the highest officlals of the 
Memphike court and conmpeised in excess of 10,000 graves-gives some idea of the size 
ofthe early administration (Wilkinson 19960). 

In discussing fhe compasitioa of Egyptian administration at any period, itis important 
to be peecise in our use f vocabulary, 1o avoid imposing on the ancient recoed modern 
distinetions whieh the ancient Egyptians themselves would not kave recognised (Quirke, 
personal communication). Particular care must be taken with the use of the word “ille'; 


since there is a tendency to describe any appellation of officialdom or administrative 
authority as a ile. Sicily speaking, the wend ‘tile’ should be applied only to tems 
which indicate rank or distinction; by contrast, most of the “titles” found in the Early 
Dynastic sources were probably mere descriptive terms, indicating membership of the 
ıruling lite or a particular brane of the adminisuration, (Compare, for example, he terms 
‘civil servant" and ‘First Secretary, both used 1o designate members of the present-day 
Bftich administration; strictly speaking, only the later is a title.) However, ia the absence 
of suficient evidence 1o distinguish beseen the wo categories, he word ‘tile is 
applied in the following discussion to al appellation of ofice, except hose few tems 
hich were clearly use as general deseiptve labels. A. secoad point 1o bear in mind 
concems Egypologists" use of the tem ‘ranking tile’. There has been a tendency 10 
apply his label to terms whose significance is not properly understood, suggesting that 
hey were used solely to designate relative status within the administetive hierarehy 
rather than paricular oMlees. This may be misguided, reflecting more on our ous 
imperfect understanding of the Egyptian language an on the ancient Egyptian 
administrative system. Tiles" are well represented on the surviving Early Dyaustic 
administrative documents, and hey even allow the management structure of some 
govemment departments t0 be analysed, Specific ites relating to particular duties will be 
discussed under their appcopfiate hesding Here we will restrict ourselves to the more 
general designations 0f aiministrative competence, 

"At fhe most basic level all officials employed by he administration would have 
sequined a certain degree of Ineracy. The use of wring ss a means of political control has 
been described as ‘the Key factor i the administration of Early Dynastic Egypt” (Shaw 
and Nicholson 1995:15). Moreover, he very origins of writing tn Egypt can be linked to 
ıa nascent national aclministeation. Supervision and coatrol of the economy o0 a national 
‘Seale required detailed secoutiag, wiaich could only be achieved by means of the written 
fecord (Postgate er al. 1995). Hence, all administrators were scribes, an the designation 

'seribe” (2h) seems to have been bome by certain individuals whose low rank ia the 
goverment did not permit hem the use of a grander ttle but wiho were, none the less, 
members of the Hlerste dile, A good example ıs Metjen's father, Inpuemankh, who musi 
have lived in the second-half of the Third Dynasty. He is described by two designations, 
23 and sl, “noble, oficial” and ‘serbe’ (Gioedieke 1966). (The wanslkeration 2 o 

‘scribe’ is generally preferred by modem philologists; note, however, a lale Second or 
early Third Dynasty seal-impressioa from the Shunet ez-Zebib which gives a phonetic 
spelling =1 [Newberry 1909: pl. XXV XVI) The mening of the fist, not aested 
Before the Third Dynasty, is not entirely clear. Ht probably iadicated membership of he 
administrative class, The second term indicates Inpuemankh's status as a literute 
administrator, but does not tell us any more about his actual responsibilities. The 
designation ‘scribe’ is first attested at the end of the First Dynasty oa a private stela from 
Abydos dating 1o the reign of Semerkhet or Qua (Pewie 1900: pl, XXX143). Further 
examples of the tem occur in the reigns of Peribsen and Netjerakhet (Petrie 1901: pl 
XXIII; Lacau and Lauer 1965.60, no. 144, respectively). Other general administrative 
terms anestel fron the Early Dynastic period include ûr. r, ‘counsellor (Petrie 1900: 
pl XXILSO: Emery 1958 pl 106-4); i# nt he who is af ihe fron (Lacau and Lauer 
1965:17, no. 23); and two coanected but obscure terms from the reign of Netjerikhet, wn. 

land f yp wm , perhaps meaning “assistant” and ‘coatroller of assistants (Lae and 


Early dma Hap o 


Lauer 1950:9, 76). The designation irik 1, “funetionary’, atested on sealings of 
Hetepsekhemuy and Nebra {Kaplony 1963, 11l figs 294, 295: Dreyer 1993b: 11; Dreyer 
et al 1996:72, fg 25, pl. 14a appears more frequently in the form rh Inst 
‘eoncemed with ıhe king's property (Weill 1908.220, 226, 256, 257 9; Junker 1930; 
Goedicke 1966) The precise nature of the oflice is not clear (or the transliteration of the 
sile see Wood 1978:15; contra Junker 1939.70; ef. Ciosdieke 1966:62) The tem may 
have designated someone vith particular sespoasibiliy fo« palace income or properly, oF 
ımay simply have reflected access 1o the ultirmate source of power: 


THE ECONOMY 


“Tuo different spheres of economic administration are discemîble in the Early Dyoastie 
sources, The first involves the exploitation of Egypt's agriculkural resources, sehieved by 
means f an organised network o royal foundations throughout the country. These land 
holdings seem to have acta both as primary producers of agricultural income for he 
Court and as collection points foe he taxation evied by the state on all peoduction in 
Egypt They were thus the siructunl backbone of the economic sytem, The second 
sphere was concemed with the processing of govemment revenue and ius redistribution to 
he various state operations which were funded in this way. These operutioas were carried 
out by fhe weasury, ihe govemment department with overall responsibilty for he 
management of the ecoaoeny, We shall examine each of these two administrative spheres 


Royal fadariont 


Ostensibly, a new royal foundation was established by each king to support his mortuary 
cult. Sealinpressions from the soyal and lte tombs of the Early Dynastic period name 
many of hese foundations, most of which can be linked to a particular ruler. Whilst each 
king seems 1o have established a new mortuary foundation, it is clear that the foundations 
of earlier kings were Requeatly maintained Hence, an. estate founded by Huni was 
malatained as late as the Fith Dynasty, while Nejerikhet's foundation was sll 
ecognised in the Nineleenth Dynasty. As We have seen, he surviving sources for Early 
Dynastic administration are undoubtedly biused, and Ihe emphasis they give t0 royal 
foundations should be regarded with caulioa. None the les, royal estales cleurly played 
san important par in the apparatus of the carly state, through thei primary economie role 
in preduction and collecion (Helck 154:131). The gradual increase in the number of 
soyal foundations must have brought a larger swrathe of agriculnural land direclly under 
Curt control The income fron these landholdings would probably have exceedel what 
was required to maintain the royal cult, and any surplss could have bee used to support 
other goverment activities. The ideological justieation for the crvation of royal 
foundations remained divine kingship and ts central importance to Egyptian civilisation. 
Just as the governing Egyptians ta New Kingdoms Nubia used state temples as agents of 
economic exploitation, so in Early Dynastic Egypt the victorious Kings of e First 
Dynasty and their successors used the royal cul la the same way (Seidlimayer 1996: 
124-6). This method of imposing effective economic management on the country is 


ims of mule 


another example of the carly state's adeptness in fashioning mech 
ihexiricably interwoven with ideology. 

In the First and Second Dynasties, most, if not all, of he royal foundations may have 
been located iı the Delta where they were to form ihe backbone for the administratioa 
ofthe region as a wihole_and more specifically in the western half. As well as being one 
ofthe most extensive ferile areas ia Egypt, it #s possible thar the western Delta was less 
densely populated and politically developed than the eastern Delta in late Predynastie 
times, Hence, it may have been regarded by Egypt's new rulers as ‘conquered 1erritoy', 
sipe for annexation and economic exploitation (Wilkinson 1996: 96). Allhough the deity 
Closely associated with royal foundations oa Early Dynastic sealings is Ash, iw laler times 
ıa local god of the estem desert oases, It is unlikely that royal estates would have been 
Îocated tn the oases themselves (contra Helck 1954-83) 

Towards the end of ihe Third Dynasty, royal landholdings seen 1o have been 
disıributed more widely. We may discem the beginnings of the Old Kingdoa's nome. 
based economic system in the distribution of the small step pyramids markers of he 
royal cult. erected by Hunî and his successor throughout Egypt. .Coastrueting hese 
monuments throughout the country could have served to make explicit and intelligtale the 
ideological backround of the sconomie demands of he seule oa a local level" 
(Seidlmayer 1996b: 122). Recent excavations ia the vicinity of one of these small 
pyramids, at Eleplaantine, have revealed an administrutive building of the Third Dynasty 
(Seidlmayer 1996a: 1996b: 121-2} Seal-impressions fromm the site indicate that he 
building was connected with the administration of the prem (see below), and that it 
employed bureaucrats with the general tiles ‘seribe" fe J and ‘funetionary (irih 1) 
The poruery assemblage is notewoclhy for its huge numbers of bread moukls and beer 
jars, indicating that the cormplex prepared and distributed basic rations 1o a large number 
Of people. Both the architecture of fhe building and its associated artefacts point to an 
economic role, and more specifically to involvement ia he administration of the royal 
estate. The complex was Hdealy Ioeuted for such a role, being close to the river-for he 
loading and unloading of commodities—and near an ares of cultivable land which may 
have belonged lo he prs 

In addition 10 the put, which seems to have supported the royal household 
directly, the Early Dynastic sources distinguish wo different types of landholding 
associated with the maintenance of the royal cult The first type is denoted by 4 
crenellated oval frame enclosing the name of the foundation. The second type is indicted 
by a rectangular enclosure with a small building in one comer which forms he 
Mieroglyph hurr For convenience, these Iwo types of foundation will be referred t0 as 
daman and estates respectively (Figures 4.1 and 42). The precise difference between 
he two is difficult to establish om ihe fragmentary sources, but there are some 
indications that domains and estates differed in both size and function, although both 
coniwibued income to support the royal cult and other state pıojecls. Esch domain was 
established by a particular king, above all 1o guarantee the mmuiatenanee of his mortuary 
welt. The oval frame probably represents the totality ofthe iostitution in question: sland, 
workforce and administrative apparatus We may envisage domains as substantial, 
hough not necessarily contiguous, areas of farming land im the Delta, cach wilh is 
dependent communities and each served by its owra bureaueracy. ln contrast, an estate 
i) seems to have designated a more specific institution, either 3 particular Incality or a 


Bary dynastic teyre 100 


foundation supplying a panicular commodity. To confuse matters, the royal palace and 
royal tomb also seen 10 have been denoted by the len wt. As the larger and more 
general economic foundations, it is domains that are attested more fiequenily in tl 
scriptions 


Figure 4.1 Royal domains. Names of royal 
foundations preserved on Early Dynastic 
seal-impresslons from Abydos and 
Saqqara: (1) Hr-sh nti- w (afer Petrie 
1901: pl. XIX.153) (2) W3 Hr (after 
Petrie 1500: pl. XVII.S (3) tpi-t-w (afer 
Petrie 1900: pl. XXL22); (4) Hrpih 1 
(aer Petrie 1901: pl. XVINL139); (5) Hr 
sîh r (afer Petrie 1900: pl. XXVLE): 
(6)#Hr- sr-h £ (ahher Petrie 1900: pl 
XXVIILT); (7) Hr-abw-h + (after Petrie 
1900: pl. XKIX.84); (8) Hr-h shî (aer 


Kaplony 1963, 1l: fg. 281); (0) wir 
ii(’) (aer Petrie 1901: pl. XXIL179%; 
(10) two writings of Hr-shî-bîw (aher 
Kaplony 1963, HI: fig. 303; and Petrie 
1901: pl. XKIIL20O); (11) Hrsh3-h nti 
pt (after Kaplony 1963, 11l: fig. 304). Not 
o same scale 


Consequently, we know eather more about the administration of domains than of estates. 


Domains 


The oval frames denoting royal domains were once identified as vineyards, because of 
he close associnion of one such foundation of Negecikhet wih wine production. 
However, it has become clear that they represent a more general type of soyal land. 
holding often, though by no means exclusively, associated with vineyards (Kaploay 
1963, 123) established 1o suppor soyal activites, especially he king's mortuary cult 
It appears that each king of the Early Dynastic period founded a new domain, he name of 
“whe usually expeessel an aspect of the god Horus (Kaplony 1963, 1: 104) 


“The earliest attested domain, hrs ntl. ww “Horus who advances the mountain (?)', rst 
appears on a sealing Rom the reign of Djer (Petrie 1901: pl. XVL124), I was maintained 
roughout fhe following reign under the management of the same individual (Anka) 
wand survived imo the reign of Den wien it was successively the esponsibility of Ankakî 
(Emery 1938:64, fg. 25, 194915, fg. 37, Medjedka (Emery 1958 pls 80-1) and 
Hemaka (Emery 193862, fig. 19, 1958: pl. 8.21). For some reason, the tomb of Memeith 
contained no references 1o hrcih mi. w, a fet which is of clear, but unknown, 
significance (Kaplony 1963, 1: 92). A sealkimpression Rom the reign of Det mentions & 
second soyal domain, W3 hr, Horus Rourishes' (Peuie 1900: pl XVILS, Emery 
954:116, ig. 50) Given the stiking similarity between this name anû ihe King's Hocus 
name (¥3 J. the domain was peobably Djer’s own foundation, hough it was maintained 
into the succeeding reign. Throughout is existence, F3 lr was apparently stministered 
by the same oflicial, Sekhemkasedj, The regency of Merncih, early in the reign of Den, 
saw the foundation Of wo new domaias. The fist, {pirt is rarely atested (Petrie 1900: 
pl XXL22); the second, krupii t, ‘Horus, fist of the corporation (of gods)" (Petrie 
T00: pi. XXL23), continued 1o fourish throughout Den's majority, being scministered 
by he high oficial Hemakı (for example, Petre 1900: pl. XXV.S3-6, Emery 1938.63, 
figs 21, 23), Afer the death of Den, each of his successors founded a new domain. The 
one established by Anedjib was calcd Ar-4b3 `, “Horus, tar of the corporation (Pete 
1900: pl. XXVLES; Emery 1949:95, tg. 35): Semerkhet's foundation was named hr- sr 
Jh ‘Horus, holy of the coportion" (Petrie 1900: pl. XXVIIL76; Qaa's domain was 
called Hr £ Horus the gold one of the coqpotstion” (Petrie 1900: pl XXIX. 4: 


Barly drastic Haymt 102 


Figure 4.2 Estates. Names of estates connected with 
provisioning the royal tomb, preserved on 
Early Dynastic sealkimpressions and 
inscribed stone vessels from Abydos and 
Saqqarn: (1) her hn (aer Emery 
1954118, fig. 159); (2) hut Zwti-genfl) 
(after Kaplony 1963, 1II: fig. 182): (3) ht 
Hr-P (after Kaplony 1963, Ill: fig. 295 
(4) er iw (after Petrie 1900: pl. XX-15): 
(S) ner ihe-nbne nwt-bity Mr-fp-JbiS 
(afer Petrie 1900: pl. XXVIILT3Y; (6) wt 
fn _ rm rw(?) (after Kaplony 1963, 1I1: 
fig. 149: (7) (8) (9) estate of unknown 
reading, attested in the reigns of Den, 
Anedjib and Nebra (after Kaplony 1963, 


II figs 249, 251, 264); (10) hur ipi?) 
(aer Petrie 1900: pl. XXVIILTT, (11) 
her p-Hr-msn (after Petrie 1900: pl. IX-1): 
(12) her p-Hrmsn nsut-hity Mi-p-bi3 
(afer Petrie 1900: pl. XXVLS8Y (13) ht 
p-Hr{-msn] iri-nbey (after Petrie 1900: pl. 
'XXVIILT2); (14) wr nswr-bûy nbti Hip 
(Kaplony 1963, 11l: fig. 282); (15) ht 23 
hî-nb (after Petrie 1900: pl. IX.2); (16) 
her z3-h3-Hr (ater Lacan and Lauer 
1959: pl. 6, no. 27); (17) (18) department 
responsible for raising (and slaughtering?) 
pigs (after Petrie 1906: pls XXILL33, 
XXVL6OJ: (19) unidentified department 
denoted by two sealed jars (after Petrie 
1900: pl. XXL29) Not to same scale. 


Emery 1958: pl. 106.11) Hence, the three foundations of the late First Dynasty seem 10 
have been name aecording 1o 8 convenion. A new naming scheme appears 1 have been 
inmoduced at the beginning of the Seeoad Dynasty, Hetepseklemwy called his domain 
HH sshd, “Hous sisen as a star” (Kaplony 1963, Il: fg. 281). No domains are 
Janested on the reigns of Nebra and Ninetjer, but this is probably due to the general 
paucity of inscriptions ftom the carly Second Dynasty. 1t is highly likely that both these 
Kings established thelr own domains or, at the very least, maintained the domains 
founded by their predecessors. The record becomes clear again towards the end of the 
Second Dynasty. The general non-confonmity of Peribsen's seign is reflected in the 
unusual name given to his domain, wt3wr.tî (2), ‘bouts of the sovereign (Petrie 1901: pl. 
XXILI7S-8O) This, foundation was maintained by bis successor Khasekhenwy 
(Kaplony 1963, II fig. 297), who also founded a new domain with s more traditional 
name, Hr-sb3-b3ir, ‘Horus, the star Of souls” (Pete 1901: pl. XXII, 190-200). Finally, at 
he beginning of the Third Dynasty, Netjerikher established a domain by the name of ir- 
Bah mip, ‘Hors, the foremost star of the sky” (Kaplony 1963, 1I1: fg. 304) This 
was to survive longer than any previous royal foundation: at e end Of the Third Dynasty 
it was administered by Pehermefer (unker 1930), and ie was still in existence is the 
Ninetecnh Dynasty, an amazing 1400 years afer Netjerikhets death (Sethe, in Garstang 
190221). 


THE ADMINISTRATION OF DOMAINS 


Tiree principal titles were coanccted with the administration of domains mH vp 
sand Hr 3 Many, if not al, of the officials delegated to administer royal foundations 
were probably royal relatives (Malek 1986-35). The ır and i rp are first 
ganested in he relgn of Djer (Petrie 1900: pls XVIILG, XIKS and 1901: pl. XXXLS, 
espectively: hrf. 3 appears in the reign of Den (Petrie 1900: pl. XKIV.AT). For some 
domains, only one title is tested; other domains appear in combination with wo o¢ more 


Early dynastic Haymt 104 


Jêles, So it is not entirely clear what distinguished the three offices. Evidence from other 
areas of the administration suggests that the mr may have been the administrator 
wih overall control of he domala's lant-holdings (since r luler came to designate 
ıa district administrator wilh a particular geographical responsibility), An exact translatioa 
of the tite is difiîculk Any lasting comnetion with irrigaion would seem to be ruled out 
by the titles car ami ‘administrutor of the desert aad. mr #36 ‘administrator 
of the hilkeountry', aested from the seigns of Qu and Nejerikhet respectively 
(Gardiner and Peet 1955:53; Emery 1958:31, pl. 39; ef Martin-Pandey 19764). Perhaps 
by he end of he First Dynasty ihe title had lost its original meaning and had simply 
come to designate an administrative postion (Martir Pandey 197644). The ¥ rp 
(contwoller') may have been in charge of the personnel belonging to and'oc employed by 
ihe domain. The hriw 3 may have exereised a more executive power, implementing 
soyal wishes and decrees with regan to the operations of he domaia. Towards the end of 
he Second Dynasty, this distincion of roles seems 10 have become blurred no 4p of a 
domain is attested after the reign of Peeibsen, and the last rir ` 3 of a domain is atested 
in the reign of Nejerikhet (Kaplony 1963, Ill: fg 304). K vas the office of nr which 
survived throughout the Early Dynastic period. 

‘Several other, more minor, titles connected with domain administration are attested ia 
Early Dyaastic inscriptions, particularly from the first'half of he First Dynasty. The il 
iw 3h rp is eenîned tn the reign of Den (Pete 1900: pl. XXIV.47-$, 1901: pl 
XX.153; Emery I958 pls 8.21, 79-16-17) and seems to indicate an oficial with 
delegated aulhority 1o implement decisions, The exact translation and significance of 
many other tiles ermine obscure, For example, the tle written with the hieroglyph of a 
swimming man has been sead hî (from the sefê “o swim’), but the meaning of this in 
he context of doin administration is unclear, unless it involves a pun on he word nl, 

"lord. An ingenious, though speculative, suggeslioa makes a coanccton between the title 
ahî and the word for ‘smelter? (also nf} known from Old Kingdom seenes of 
hetalworkers. IF bots words share a common derivation, The mot meaning of AM may be 

1o pour’. ln this case, fhe title may have designated the official who actually filled 
containers with produce (hy pouring) fom a given domain (Kaploay 1963, I: 126). A 
compound tile, 4 Fp bi is more common from the reign of Den onwards (fur example, 
Petrie 1901: pl XIX 146 S0). Diftieulties also surround the meaning of fhe tile read as 
walk mw (foc example, Petrie 1901: pl. XVL122) (or h xp nh ewr in the reign of Den [r 
Example, Petrie I901: pl. XVIHII-142-3]). A connection with ihe town of Nekhen 
(Hierakonpolis) seems unlikely, given the contexts in which the title occurs, as does & 
ink wil the word n n, ‘fortress’. Rather easier 1o understand are the pair of titles i 
iê (Peleie 1901: pl. XIK.153) and K rp hrEib (for example, Petrie 1901: pl. XVIIL140) 
They refer to a position ‘at the heart of the system and probably designated senior 
oficial within the adiministratioa of domains. 

£A notable feature of e sdministrtion during the reign of Den is the preponderance of 
sles compounded with the word r p ‘controller’. Examples alteady quoted are hp 
ARL rp ml ms and ¥ xp MED. Whether the appearance of such compound tiles 
indicates adminisrative reforms cannot be proven, bur ther evidence suggests that Den's 
feign was a period of innovation. 

By the reig of Peribsen, only he titles A op, A p Mri, hriw 3 and mr 
remained in the context of domain administration (Kaplony 1963, 1: 155). Only the last 


survived into the Thin Dynasty. This may suggest a eıtionalisation of domain 
administration, possibly by diseontnuîng some of the ancient (honorific?) titles ia favour 
ofa more explicit aad steean-linad structure. 


Estes 


Speeife estates are attested fiom the reign of Djet oavwands. Some are impossible to 
identify, with certainty; others probably indicate individual localities, specialised 
production centres, or particular institutions closely associated with he King and his 
household. The identity of the earliest known estate, our hı (Emery 1954:118, ig. 159) 
is unclear, as is the foundation named after King Den, wr Zrii gen (7) (Emery 1958: pl 
$81.36) A seal-impression of Nebra may record an estate in the Vicinity of Bur, hur HFF 
(Kaploay 1963, 11l: fig. 295). Certainly, Buto was an important cere from Predynastie 
times and undoubtedly maintained close ideological links with the monarchy throughout 
he Early Dynastic period. A sealing fro the tomb of Memeith meations hr hw (Petrie 
1900: pl. XK-15, and judging by fhe much later iaseriptioas of Metjen and Pebermefer, 
this may have been he name of a particular loealiy ia the westem Dek, perhaps in he 
vicinity of Kons el-Hisa (Wenke and Brewer 1996268). The Delta seems 1o bave been 
closely associated wil cattle reariag_—as reflected tn the prevalence of cattle amongst the 
emblems of the Delta nomes_and hv hw may have been the most important catle> 
producing centre of early times, A further connection berwecn the western Delta and 
Sane rearing may be indicated by the herds depicted oa the so-called ‘Libyan paleie 
(Wenke and Brewer 1996-268), Another estıte connected with calle, ‘the estute of the 
golden cule of the dual king’ (wt ıine-nhw nwr-hily Mr-(>)Bi3) is mentioned oa 
sealings of Anedjib fom Abyulos (Petrie 1900: pl XXVILTS-4). An estate perhaps set 
dp to supply the court with a particular commodity is he foundation called wt OM 7 
ır n (‘the estate OF natron ofthe gods’, mentioned in an inseription fron the reign of 
Ninejer (Kaplony 1963, IIL fig. 149), A further estate of unknown reading is mentioned 
won seslings of Den and Anedjib, and may still have bee in existence during the reign of 
Nebra (Kaploay 1963, I1: figs 249, 251, 264). 

A sealkimpression fiom the tomb of Semerkhet makes reference ta hut iptî (7) (Petrie 
1900: pl. XXVIILTT), This may be an estate connected with the queen's household, since 
ihe word fpr means ‘harem palace’. The instirution called ht .Hrcmsn (tor example, 
Lacan and Laver 1959: pl 4 no. 21)also read hut ptr J (Dreyer et al. 1996-71) 
has been identified as the royal palace, perhaps located in Buto foe the King as ruler of 
Lower Egypt (Weill 1961135). is mentioned in inscriptions of he Fit, Secoad and 
Third Dynasties (Laeau and Lauer 1965:80, no. 216; Dreyer e al. 1996:76, ig. 28, pl 
15 lef and T2, fig 25, pl 14a) In the reigns of Anedjıb and Semerkhel, he estale 
peihaps sepcesenting the entirely of the palace, its lands and inconme_boee the king's 
ame hut pHi new BIY Mr-p-Bi? anl hv p-Hrnacn] elb. respecively (Petrie 
"1900: pls XXVLS8_60, XXVIILT2). A different, though perhaps related, estate ks known 
from the reign of Hetepsekhemuy at the beginning of the Second Dynasty, once again 
bearing the King's name: ht new-bîly aby Hp (Kaplony 1963, Il. figs 281-2). The 
other hut closely associated with the King, the hut 21-F3nbinw? 3h3. appears in 
Jimseriptioas ftom the end of the First Dynasty (Petrig 1900: pls 1X.1-2, XXX; Lacau and 
Lauer 1959: pl 6 nos 26-9; Dreyer ef al 1996:75, pl. 151b right). He too has been 


Early dynastic teyre 106 


interpreted as the royal residence (Weill 161:141), but more likely refers to the royal 
tomb as a separate iostturion with its own economic demands and administraflve 
apparatus (Roth 1991:1668). 


Te meanuy and ts aches 


We have seen how EgypI's agricultural resources wete exploited by the cour through the 
mechanism of royal foundations, The aetual collection of revenue, ts stocage, processing 
and redistribution was the responsîbility of a separate institution, the treasury (Figure 
43). This was the govemment department which directly managed the income of he 
skate, and as such stood st the very centre of the administratioa. Ht was the treasuny that 
assessed and levied taxation, filled he govemment coffers with agricultural produce, and 
supplied the various branches of the court with revenue to fund heir activities and 
Commodinies to sustain their employees. 


“Taxation and collection 


Ink inscriptions on potery vessels from the late Predynastic period make it clear that, 
wight fiom the beginning of the Egyplian state, taxation was levied separıtely on the two 
halves of the coutry {Figure 447 Inseripûons on vessels fiom the tomb of ‘Ka’ 
Abydos mention either Lower Egyptian or Upper Egyptian revenue (Petrie 1902: pls 

D. A similar division în the colleztion of produce is attested in the following reigns of 
Narmer and Aha (Kaplony 1964: gs 1061, 1063, Emery 1939: pls 14 [sie]. 20-2). The 
separate collection of revenue from Upper and Lower Egypt is also indicated by a sealing 
of Peribsen which mentions the seal-bearer of the Lower Egyptian delivery (mw iw. 
HB), probably the individual sespoasible for the treasury s income fromm Lover Egypt 
(Petrie 1901: pl. XKILISA, 186). As well as highlighting the duality shich pervaded 
FEaytian thought, this binary division in the measury's opertions probably refleeis 
geographical and topographical factors, The physical difference belween Upper and 
Tower Egypt would have made the colietion of agricultural produce a very different 
undertaking in each region. In Upper Egypt, where the fields are disuibuted along he 
narrow Mosdplain, gathering revenue could have been achieved by a fleet of barges 
Cruising slowly up-or downstream By contrast, access to the fields of Lower Egypt 
spread throughout the Delta, would have been far more dificult. It is quite likely that 
central eollcetion points would have been established at strategie locations, probably on 
he major Nile branches la short, he collection of revenue by the central treasury would 
have been most efficiently organised by dividing the country into two halves. 

This practice may be reflected in he hwo different names give to the treasury in the 
Early Dynastic period, laseriptioas mention either the pr-# , ‘white house’, of the pr- 
dr red house’. The focmer seems to be the earlier ame for the treasury and is first 
ıatested carly in the rei of Den, on sealimpressions fron the tomb of Merneith (Petrie 
1900: pls XXIL36, XXIIL40). Towards the end of the First Dynasty, for reasons 


rm our sane 
amt ere Farrt 


TAXATION AND COLLECTION 


manUEAOTURE oF sronagE 
meoisraisuTion 


Figure 43 The treasury and its functions. The chart 
shows the principal operations carried out 
by the treasury in the Early Dynastic 
period (based upon information fom 
comtemporary sources: sealkimpressions, 


inscribed stone vessels, and the Third 
Dynasty tomb inscription of Pehemel 


rem, 


۴ كو ك 


which ane unclear, the name for the treasury was change to pdr. This institution is 
anested ia the reigns of Anedjib (Petrie 1900: pl. XXVIL6E, Qas (Petrie 1900: pls 
XXIX.85, XXX) and Ninejer (Laeau and Lauer 1950: pl. 14 no, 70; Kaplony 1963, 1l: 
figs 46, H8). With the secession of SekhemibPerihsen, the name reverted 10 prc 

(Petrie 1901: pls XKLI67, 160, and XXILIS2, 183), caly to be changed back to pra 
under Khasekhennwy (Pete 1901; pl. XKIIL 101, 192, 196). The name remained pri 
during he reign oF Nejerikhet (Kaplony 1963, 11l fg. 318), and was changed for ihe last 
time under his successor Sekhemkhet to pri, ‘the two while houses’ (Goncim 
1957:1415), perhaps reflecting an amalgamstion of wo previously separte institutions. 
Because he colours white and red are also the colours of the Upper and Lower Egyptian 
crowns respectively, It is tempting to see the pr-ê ` as an Upper Egyptian instinunion, the 
pdr as its Lower Egyptian couterpart. The two names would then reflect the logical 
‘hivision of he treasury's operutions into two halves, However, he to seem never 1o 
have coexisted, so the preference given to one name of the other might reflect he central 
administration's shifing centre of gravy The initial change fro pr. 1o pri might 
indicate a relocation of the state redistributive apparatus to Memphis ia the lamer part of 


he Fit Dynasty, The continued use of the name pradlir by the Kings of the carly Second 
Dynasty certainly complements the Iocatioa of their tombs at Saqqara and the general 
Lower Egyptian emphasis of the court at this time. The change of name back to the older 
ph under Sekhemih/Peribsen tics in with the Upper Egyptian emphasis of his reign: 
Peribsen rexadopted Abydos as the sile of the royal mortuary conaplex and he is attested 
only in Upper Egypt The final change in nomenclature (to prwl-# 7 under Sekhenkhet 
possibly indicates an ideological compromise, reconciling he competing traditions of 
Upper and Lower Egypt in a new, unified institution. 


Storage 


Inseriptions of the Second Dynasty mention a sub-deparıment of the treasury called the 
pln (Lacau and Lever 1959: pl 18 no. 90; Kaploay 1963, I: fig. 36), The 
herivation of the word is not altogether clear, but it seems to have bee cither the 
department responsible foe (corvêe?) labour or, more likely perhaps, the department 
charged with the storage of agrieultural produce prior to its redistribution, The pri 
would then have comprised large-scale storage fuciities and would puobably have 
managed the government surpluses held in long-term stocage__for example, the ‘bufer 
socks of graln_as well as the produce received ia the form of taxation and later 
edisuibuned 

Cereals were probably the staple crops of Egyptian agıiculture in the Early Dynastic 
period, as in later times, and grata supplies must have lain at the heart of the resus 
operations. The storage of large stocks of grain was a vital necessity, not oaly to pay he 
cour itself with ts hundreds of dependent oflicials, but also to guard against years with 
ponc harvests, At such times, the emergency supplies held by the goverment provided 
e only security for ordinary Egypuans, the vast mujority of whom were peasant 
farmers, The ability of the goverment 1o provide a degree of economic security must 
have brought real benefits to the Egyptian population, and would have been oac of he 
most tangible benefits of a united counuy with û centrally controlled economy. 
Curiously, tbe central government grınares are not explicitly anested before the Third 
Dynasty, although they sust have existed fro the very beginning of the Egyptian state, 
perhaps under a ditfecen department of the treasury They may have been an Htegtal part 
Of the ph fpr-dîr in the first two dynasties, only 0 be given separate status at he 
beginning of he Third Dynasty. Granaries are mentioned on a seal-impression of Sanakht 
fom Belt Khallaf (Garstang 1902: pl. 19.7; Scidlmayer 1996; pl. 23), while he official 
Pehermefer vras ‘overseer of al the king's granaries finir3 n nb n nsw) at the end of 
the Thinl Dynasty (Junker 1930). 


Redistribution 


Another instiusion closely connected with the operations of he treasury was the prc: 
wh, he ‘house of redistribution” (sometimes Iranslated ‘house of largesse’). This is 
attested fiom fhe reign of Khasekhemwy (Petrie 1901: pl. XXIIL197) and is mentioned 
quite frequently in oficial sources of the Third Dynasty (for example, Junker 1939). The 
prhrinw b wns probably he department of the treasury diretly responsible for the 
distribution of agricultural produce to recipients throughout Egypt, including state 


Bary dynastic teyre 110 


employees and provincial cults (Gardiner 193885-9; Malek 198635; but note 
Wacburton 1997:72). Standing at the centre of the state economic apparatus, the pri 
wh must have bee a key department of the Early Dynastic administration. 


Provisioning 


An impoant activity coanected vith the collection and redistribution of income is 
anested fom ihe reign of SekbemibiPeribsen. This is lz 7. the ‘provisioning 
depariment' (Petrie 1901: pl. XXL165), Mt seems to have acted as û constituent 
department of he treasury, whether the pr-h ` under Sekhemih/Peribsen (Petrie 1901: p1 
XXII67, 174, pl. XXILIRD) oc the pradir under his suecessor Khasekhemwy (Petrie 
1901: pl. XXINIOD, A provisioning department of the prs is also attested ia he 
reign of Khasekhemwy (Petrie 1901: pl. XXIIL201), indicating that tis administrative 
innovatioa was no restricted to the management of state income but was applied equally 
to the personal economic resourecs of the king. At the ead of the Second and beginning 
of he Third Dynasty, sealkimpressions mention a provisioning department coanected 
wil he vineyanls of Memphis (Kaplony 1963, 1II: figs 310, 318). 


Manufacture of secondary products 


The tresury was not only responsible for the collection, sorage and redistribution of 
income in he form of agrieulural produce, it also controlled the manuficture of 
secondary products fromm these primary commodities, Products such as oil and me 
bed and beer, were required for the provisioning of the royal household anıl the cour i 
general. The manufacture of secondary producls seems to have been divide amongst a 
umber of specialist departments. Somme of these are attested tom ihe First and Second 
Dymasties, Many more are listed in the tomb inseription of Pebemefer at the end of he 
Third Dynasty. 

The earliest atested specialist department is the oilkpress, named on an ebony label of 
Den from Abydos (Petrie 1900: pl. XV-16). Many of the so-called year labels of First 
Dynasty Kings were originally atıached 1o jars of oil. The oilkpress department of the 

easury would have undertaken the processing of this valuable conmodiy. Also orm 
he reign of Den, an unidentifiet department denoted by two sealed jars is mentioned on 
several sealimpressions. I probably had some conmecûon with the production of 
commodities, but iis impossible to be more precise. 

"A department responsible for raising (and slaughtering?) pigs is mentioned on a 
sealing fiom the tomb of Mermeith (Petrie 1900: pl. XXIL3) and on another from he 
reign of Anedjib (Perse 1900: pl. XXVL6O), A further reference 1o mest production is 4 
sealîmpression from the reign of Perîbsen which seems 1o have been amade by the ‘seal. 
bearer Of the daily meat rion" (transliteratioa uncertain) {Petrie 1901: pl. XXILIES) 
"The inscription of Pehernefer mentions a ‘house of beel-fat (or...) as a deparument of 
he mensury (Junker 1939), perhaps indicating thar products such as tallow were he 
responsibility of a separate operation. Meat must have been a prestigious covmmodiy, 
beyond the means of many ordinary people. I comes as ile of s surprise, herefoce, that 
he government had its own slaughterhouses and that meat production was delegated to a 
specie department of the treasury. 


The specialist departments listed in Pahermefer's tomb inscription (Junker 1939) 
include those concerned with the production of ihe primary staples of the ancient 
Egyptian diel, bread and beer. The manufcluee of bread was divided between the millers 
and the bakers. These tasks were subdivided in tum. The millers were split into at least 
wo different departmeats, responsible for the milling of different grades of Nour: our 1o 
be made alo ¥ °3 bread in one case, wheal-grain (%0 in another. Two different categories 
ıo baker are attested, rıh bakers and iw bakers, although it is not entirely clear hov their 
functions differed. These ewro types Of baker are named agai in the Old Kingdoms tomb 
of Kaninisut at Giza, where hey are shown bringing offerings of bread to the torab owner 
(Junker 1939). The Soe jour (or is variant pag) is the most common verb associated with 
bread manufacture (Verhoeven 1984:85) and seems to have been the general term for 
bake". "prepare (bread); i could refer 10 the baking of bread directly over a fire or in a 
mould (Verhoeven 1984.208). The mening of the rarer term %h is less clea though a 
connection with bread used for culic purposes is possible (Verhoeven I9B:169) 
Perhaps the Iwo types of baker mentions in Pehernefer's inscription wete responsible 
for baking bread for cultic purposes on the one kund and bees for normal domestic 
ıconsuption on the other. The brewers seenı to have been divided on geographical lines 
into those attache to the Lover Egyplan storage facility (erin ‘Mwy aad those 
anached to the Upper Egyptian storage fheiliy (rde Hut) 

The processing of des ino sweet cakes andlor date wine was the prerogative of a 
separate deparment, as was the preparation anf manufacture of linen and buskethotk. 
Old Kingdon tomb scenes indicate that flax was an important crop in ancient Egyp, and 
his is reflected in the careful organisation suerunding the processing of this resourte. 
The raw flax was supervised by one department (hur mh J the filling (washing) of he 
fax by a second (vt hmv), and the final manufacture of linen by a third (hur im 1). 
Basketwork, using the abundant supplies of reeds ftom the Nile valley, was organised 
int a further specialist uni finut m39 

The deparaments of ihe treasury attested in the tomb of Pehemefer thus reflect the 
principal crops of ancient Egypt, and emphasise the importance of bread and beer in the 
FEyptlan diet, even the dict of he count 


Tressucy oflicials 


The earliest atested title connected with the treasury is an ‘ollicial of the whitehouse’ 
frie pırd ) eacly in the reign of Den (Petrie 1900: pls XXIL3S, XXIIL4AO) In the 
Third Dynasty, he Oficial with similar responsîbiliy was the overseer” (iir ph J 
ıa ille borne by Nefer, Merî (Weill 1908-236 42, pl IV; Helek 1954:61) and Pehemeler 
(Junker 1930). Pehemefer also held three other itles connected with the ueasury: ih 1 
ph sh ih rp and hrs 3t ph . The fist of these stems to indicate 
Merely a funclonary of the treasury, fhe second a higher level of official with 4 
supenîsary ıole over other employees. The thin tille probably designated the seal. 
bearer, an irmportant role la ancient Egyptian administration, x ras the bearer of the seal 
who, as the representative of authonty, had ulimate responsibility for he daily 
management of 3 particular lastitution. However, the Aris 31 pê dots not seem to 
have been at the Very top Of the treasury hierarchy; this position was occupied by the 
King's personal representative, the A mci; ‘royal seal-bearer’ (also translated as 


Barly drastic taye 112 


‘royal chancellor’), This title is sometimes rendesed as ‘chancellor of the king of Lower 
Egypt’. Rather thn being a geographical designation, however, iis more likely that the 
word hily refers to the secular sole of he King as hend of slute and govemment (see 
Chapter 6). Two “royal sealkbenrers’ are known fom the reign of Don: Setka (Emery 
1958: pl. 81.37), and the more famous Hemaka (Emery 1938:64, fg, 24), whose status is 
reflected in his huge palsce-façade tomb at Nol Saqqara, equipped With a weal of 
grave goods, The pre-eminent posiion of the ê xmuw-hiy in the royal administration 
(Mitek 1986:35) i futher iilustrsted by the fect thur the title was bome by lhotep, 
famed as Djoser's chief miniser and the arehiteet of he Step Pyramid complex. In 
ancient Egypt, all political authority derived ultimately fom the king Hence, he 
individual sho cared the King's own seal Was the representative and agent oF the 
supreme power in the land. The tile of # immw-hily must Mherefore have carried 
considerable symbolic as well as executive authority. A sealkimmpression fron the reign of 
Peribsen gives a tle which may be read as mwas (Peri 1901: pl. XXL164). (The 
proposed reading of this ile on a sealing Troan the Shunt ez-Zebîb [Newberry 1909: pl 
XXV XVII seems rather more doubtful since the ¥ om” sign looks indistinguishable 
fiom an anl) IF so, Tis could be interpreted as an explicitly Upper Egyptian altemative 
to the more usual fitle mbi ak would provide yet another indicalioa of he 
emphasis plaecd upon Upper Eypt and Upper Egyptian tiles by Peribsen, (The other 
possible reading of e le, % mw Sm © ‘sealbeater Of Upper Egypt. would have 
similar connotations) Tuo further seal beaters are atested during the reign of Peribsen, 
seal-hearer of the dally ment ration and a seal-bearer of the Lower Egyptian delivery (see 
above), emphasising he important sole playel by such officials in the Egyptian 
Rdinlatraive syste. 

We know comparatively litle about the administration ofthe state granaries, and what 
evidence there is comes fron the Third Dynasty. A ‘controller’ (1 rp) of grannies is 
mentioned on a sealing of the reign of Sanakht rom Beit Khalaf (Garstang 1902: pl 
19.7; Seidimayer 1996b: pl. 23), whilst at the end of the dynasty Pebemefer was is 
overall coal of the eenral grain stoeks in his capacity as ‘overseer of all the King's 
granaries' [ini-r3 fmt nb nî as. 

“The redistributive function of the treasury involved a nunıber of diflerent officials. A 
sealing fom the reign of Khasekhemwy mentions an ‘executive of he house of 
sedistibution' (hin 3 prchriw B) who was probably in overall charge (Weill 
908:102). The other titles come from Third Dynasty sources and seem to indicate 
different ranks within the department 2h _prmhriw $, a seribal post (Weill 1908:2269 
ww amd (prichriw b, a tlle bome by Akhetaa, possibly denoting an official with 
decisionmaking authority (Weill 1908.262739): sh pr-hria h, a supervisory sole, 
performed by Metjen (Goedieke 1966): and imir3 prwlriw A, the “overseer Of the 
department, a position held by Pehernefer (lunker 1939), The obseure ‘estate of life” fit 
J seems 1o have had its own sedistributive function at the end of the Third Dynasty: 
din addiion to his many othee ites, Aknetaa held the post of hriw b hut al , ‘head of 
redisribution of the estate of Iife(?)" (Weill 1908-26273). la later periods, he ‘house of 
Hile’ (or. nh J was the name given o the temple institution where religious texts were 
composed and copied, but the Early Drastic vt nh peobably performed a different 
sole 


The provisioning department would clearly have required a literate bureaueraey to 
keep detailed accounts of income and outgoings, and a ‘seribe of he provisioning 
depariment' (i> 3) ix auested from the reign of Peribsen (Petrie 1901: pl 
XXI 

The specialist departments of the treasury which processed the agricultural produce 
and manufactured secondary produets were each controlled by an ‘overseer (ini-r3) 
except for he bakers and date pıocessots who were under he supervision of ‘eontwollers 
f sp AE the end of the Third Dynasly, certain vineyards were also administered by 
Pehemefer in his capacity as ‘conuroller” (7p). In general, the usual title for an official 
at the head of a department or operation during the Third Dynasty seems 1o have bees 
mir3, whereas hp appears to have been used o refer to an individual wilh 4 
supervisory sole over other employees. 


Fe prnswt 


Alhough in theory all land probably belonged to the king, in practice a distinction was 
made between state income and the king's private income. From the reign of Diet 
inscriptions attest, in parallel with the pr-h 7 pdr. a separate depament of the 
administration responsible for the personal estates and income of the king (Pevie I900: 
pl XXXLS) This astitution, he pst ras presumably concemed with supporting the 
King, the royal family and the royal retinue, as distinct Troan royal building projects which 
were the responsibility of the central govemmmen. The pram? was probably under direct 
soyal eonuol (Husson snd Valbelle 199229), i» const to the more outlying royal 
domains and estes which were administered on behalf of the king. alike these 
foundations, litle is known about the composition, structure and organisation of the pr- 
swt At the end of the Third Dynasty, the inscription of Metjen mentions a parallel 
institution serving the qusen mother (or-mwcnsw) (Goedicke 1966) (Note hat a 
possible idenifieation of the prnswr ss the palace buildings seers to be ruled out by 
explicit references to ‘the palace’ [û] in Early Dynastic tiles: see belo J 

The pronnewt sees to have had û separate administratioa. Three tiles refering to the 
prem are known from the Early Dynastic period: ‘coatwoller” (%1) in the rega of 
Die (Petrie 1900: pl. XXXL, ‘companion (unr) on the sicla of Sabe? from the reign of 
Qas (Petrie 1900: pl. XXX), and ‘servantemployee" (lor) in the late Third Dynasty 
(Weill 1908:262-74; Goedicke 1966 Bod Akhetua and Metjen bore the last title, 
suggesting that t ejoyel a ceqain stahıs due 1o its close coneetion wih the person of 
e king. Megjen was alo a ‘servanl/employee' (hw) of the queen mother's esle. 


THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COURT 


Royal works 


The effective management of royal building peojecete— mortuary complexes and state- 
sponsored temple construction must have required a substantial, administrative 
apparatus, Unfortunately, very ile evidence survives froı the Early Dynastic period 
Coneeming the organisation and administration of these activities. What sources there are 


Barly drastic Haymt 114 


date exelusively to the Third Dynasty, so that wre know nothing of hou royal coastruction 
projects were organised during the Hirst to dynasties. Several individual craftsmen are 
mentioned in inscriptions of Negjerkher's reign, including a controller of crahsmen 
(sp haris) (Lae and Lauer 1965:64, ne.156), an incpecloc of mmusons (ih mw) 
(Weill 1908-180; Kaplony 1963, I: fig. 324) and a royal mason (mh mi) the last 
being a member of a turquoise-nining expedition 1o the Sinai (Gardiner and Peet 1952: 
pl. D. Atthe vey end of the Third Dynasty Pehemefer bore the title inıiy3 KF n nf new 
overseer of all the King's works’. This was the office held in the Old Kingdom by the 
person in charge of royal building activities. Whether a similar position existed in the 
first wo dynasties, oc whether the advent of pyramid-building in the Thin Dynasty made 
ısuch a post necessary for the first time, cannot be aseertained from the meagre evidence 
Jaf our disposal. According to the biographical inserîptions of Old Kingdon overseers of 
works, he position included responsibility for all projects requiring large sesourees of 
muterials andor manpower: soyal building projets, the construction of bouts and 
fashioning OF large-scale statuary, expeditions 1o quarry stone, he transport of goods anl 
materials, irigalioa works, perhaps even agricultural work (Husson and Valbelle 
102.42). 

Demanding activities such as construction projects and the maintenance of cults 
sequined a disciplined and effective wodeforce, and a specialised administrative 
Mechanism was employed to maximise the efficleney of work teams. This was he 
rotational pyle system, whose origins go back at least as far as the Fit Dynasty (Roth 
1o0 


Epedinions festlvol and the royal bout 


A development of great significance at he beginning of the Third Dynasty was he 
organisation of regular mining expeditions to the Sinai, to obtain supplies of turquoise 
fiom he area of the Wadi Maghara. Expeditions under Nejerikhet, Sekhemkhet and 
‘Sanakht eae lefî a record of their visit, in the fom of a rock-eut scene (Gardiner and 
Peet 19S2: pls 1, IV). The inseriptions fro the segs of Nejerikhet and Sethenkhet 
depict the expedition leader, complete with tiles. In both cases the operation was under 
he control of the imi mh , overseer OF the expedition’. An additional member of the 
Negjerikhet expediion, named as Hemn, wras designated as iri-{ 3.) 3orwt, keeper of 
he (door t0 the) Aslatics'. He therefoce seems to have been rcaponsiele in some way Or 
the loeal (Palestinian) inhabitants of fhe Sinai. Just as the economic exploitation of he 
Delta through 8 network of royal foundations seems to have led to the development of a 
system of regional administration for Lower Egypt, s0 Egyptian economic involvement in 
he Sinai and Near East rmay have underlaia the wnpositon of more dircet state control in 
the desert and border regions of Egypt (see belo). 

The files preserved on the selat of Merka and Sabef from the reign of Qaa (Emery 
1958: pl. 39; and Petrie 1900: pl. XXX, respectively) inelude unique references 1o certain 
royal seivies which must have bee a festure OF the Egyplian court throughout he 
Early Dynastic period. Qa clearly enjoyed a lengthy reign, and Sabef was charged with 
ıoversecing arrangements for the King's Sed-festival (ini? h-sd). The responsibility r 
organising his pre-eminent eclebxarion of kingship would have been assigned to a trusted 
member of the King's entourage. Sabe s status in this respect is emphasised by his burial 


within the king's own mortuary complex, at Abydos. Merka also performed important 
duties at court One ofthese was A rp t3s “controller of the royal bark, indicating 
responsibility Tor the ship that amay have been used by the king on his regular progresses. 
The character of early Kingship seems to have bee peripatetie, he monarcl ttvelling 

woughout Egypt on a regular basis, not only 10 visit major shrines and take part in 
impûrtant annus! festivals but also to reinforce the bonds between ruler and ruled Royal 
travel must have played a significant role in he mechanism of carly Egyptian 
administration, and the importance attached 1o the tile ‘controller of the royal bark” no 
doubt reflects this 


Cuurtly tiles 


As well as employing distinct bureauerscies for particular activities, sue as those listed 
above, the court seems to have compeised numerous officials with general competence 
sther than specitîc duties. We should probably envisage a circle of rasta individuals ia 
he service Of the King, Whose duties were rather fluid and were assigned according to 
needs and circunıstanecs. These most influential of state eıployees wete probably royal 
Kime, and the les hey bore expressed their proximity 1o the king, Ihe ultimate 
source of all authority. Such titles, which we may call ‘ovurtly', are the most numerous in 
Early Dynastic inseriptions. They shed some light on he intemal workiags of the royal 
household, but rather more on he nature of euely Egyptian administration, whieh 
sephasised selative status within the hierarchy more than specie respoasibiliies. 

"A good example is irip 1 This may have had a specific meaning in the Predynastie 
period, but by the tine i is firt tested, ia the anddle of the First Dynasty (Emery 
1958:60, pl. 83.1), it seems to have designated membership of the ruling lite (o 1% as 
opposed t0 the general populace (#3). More specifically, i is likely that the p1 were 
yal Kinsmen (Baines 1995-133), for sehom the highest echelons of govemment were 
fevered until the threshold ofthe Old Kingdom. On the sela of Merka, fron the reign of 
Qas (Emery 1958: pl. 30), e tle appears in 3 prominent position, subordinate only to 
sftn, indicating the status (and polical power?) attached to belag an irp 1 in the First 
Dymasty. 

Another tile with possible Predyrantic significance is ir 1, ‘keeper of Nekhen' 
(ef Fischer 1996:43-5). When Nekhen (Hierakoapolis) was an important centre, playing 
ıa pivotal role in he process of state fornation, he Keeper of Nekhen’ may haVe been & 
prestigious position. By the Early Dynastic period, however, the meaning of the ttle may 
have been lost (at least, is npenctrable to modem scholars), leaving Iri-NA ` as a 
honorife designation bome by high officials, f0« example Nedjemunkh in the reign of 
Netjerikhet (Weill 1908-180: Kaplay 1963, I1I fg. 124). To possible courtly tiles of 
unknown meaning from the early part of Den's rei are î , associated with Aakl-ka 
and Sekh.ka (Petrie 1900: pls XXL29, X130; Emery I58: pls 0-1.1064) and 

sp?) associated with the latter (Pewie 1900: pl. XKIL30; Emery 1958: pl. 1064). 
However even he reading of the wo groups of signs is uncertain, and they may noi 
repeeset titles at all 

A number OF different titles expressed the position of the holder within the circles of 
power which surrounded the ruler, Merka, st the end of the First Dynasty, was inert 

'a follower of the King" (Emery 1958: pl. 30), while an oficial of the Second or Third 


Early drastic taye 116 


Dynasty was content to call himself hr-aswt, ‘servant of the king’ (Lacan and Lauer 
1965:36, no. 4T). A parallel title may be the one bome by the king's sandal-bearer on the 
Narmer palette and macehead (Winter 1994). la both cases the title may perhaps be read 
sas ‘servant of he miler’ A more exalted position wras indicated by fhe ble Arp ow 
“ehier one of the king, mentioned in irseriptions from the lute Secoad and Thin 
Dynasties (Petrie 1901: pl. XXI165 Junker 1939; Lacs and Lauer 1965:34, no. 43) 
Akhetaa, who lived during the later half of the Third Dynasty, appears to have been one 
of the king's innermost circle of advises, if the meaning of is tle ‘privy to al he 
secrets and affairs of the king (hrî st? nb %1 abr w new) is to be taken at Rıce value 
(Weill 1908-26273). (Note, however, that somme commentators have identified hri-sitS 
as a religious tile [ef. Fischer 1996-45-9 who reads the Hile shy 71) Pehemefer's tile, 
Jas m he eho has the car (of the King)" would also seem to indicate a position at the 
very centre of the court, even though the king is not mentioned explicily. 

"Another category of courtly tiles makes reference 10 particular chambers within the 
palace as a way of indienting proximity to the king. The tiles held by some members of 
ihe court in presentday Britain muy be cite as parallels, r example, ‘Lord 
Chamberlain” (lhe person having control over many of the royal household's employees) 
In ancient Egypt, access ta the innermost rooms of the palace must have brought with ii 
access to the percon of the ruler, considerable prestige which went with this access, and 
perhaps real influence in the decisionmaking processes of government. Titles in this 
Category are attested only in the reign of Qaa and in the Third Dynasty, but they must 
have existed throughout the Early Dynastic period. Tuo tiles are connected vith he 
runing of the palace itself ( A). The ofîcial Merka in the reign of Qua bore the title 
ap h ‘eontoller (perhaps ‘comptroller’ would be a better English equivalent of he 
palace’ (Emery 1958: pl. 39). Abneb, who lived ia the late Second or early Third 
Dynasty, held a similar position, intr? ` h, ‘overseer of the palace’ (Weill 1908.220) 
Within ihe palace, wo chambers seem to have been of particular significance: i 
sometimes translated ss ‘council chamber’, and sh possibly *dining-hall” oc ‘audience 
chamber. Thus an fri ‘one who is in the council chamber (Laeau and Lauer 1965-1 
no. 21), ad a smsmw-i ‘elder of the council chamber’, are known fiom the Third Dynasty 
(Gardiner and Poet 1952: pl. 1). At the end of the First Dynasty, Merka, as well as being 
comptroller of the palace as a whole, was also ‘eomptuoller OF the audience chamber 
(û pJ; this tle was later held by Pehemefer at the end of the Third Dynasty, Merka's 
Contemporary, Sabef, deseribed himself as ‘foremost of the audience chamber” f ii 
SJ, whilst Akh, aû offical who lived carly in the Third Dynasty, was simply a 
"finctionary of he sudience chamber, ( Ii £2) (Weill 108:185) 


The vizier 


We now come to the position at the very head of the administration, the official closest to 
he king, At different stages of the Early Dynastic period, this person bore he tiles _ 1 
and i 23b 3u (Figure 4.5). An individunl designated as 1 is the earliest tested 
oficial of any Kind, depicted oa the Narmer palette. He walks in fiont of the king, 
carrying whut appeurs to be sn Nem of the royal regalia. On the Narmer macehead he 
appears again, his time standing behind the enthroned king, where he is labelled simply 


as. The meaning of the tile is uncertain, but the position of the holder visû-vls he 
King seems clear enough 

Ris tempting to link his title with the one bome by the vizier in later periods: 31i or 
in its fuller fom, UT 230 3il The vizier stood at he head of the Egyptian 
administration and was responsible directly to the king for the goverment ofthe county 
The position was certainly in existence by the beginning of the Third Dynasty. The 
earliestknown holder of the title was a man named Menka who is mentioned oa & 
number of ink insertions Rom beneath the Step Pyramid (Lacau and Lauer 1965:1, ne. 
1). These may date to the middle of the Second Dynasty (Shaw and Nicholson 1905:15), 
perhaps 10 ihe reign of Ninetjer (Helck 1979). Alternatively, it is possible that he 
Construction of the Step Pyramid, which must have required a degree of administrative 
organisation and 


Figure 4.5 The titles of the vizier. The earliest 
atested reference to the highest 
administrative office in Egypt, written in 
ink on a stone vessel from the Step 
Pyramid complex of Nejerikhet at 
Saqqara. The inseription, which probably 
dates to the middle of the Second Dynasty, 
names ihe vizier as Menka, and gives the 
tripartite title associated with the vizierate 
throughout Egyptian history, rit 23} ti 
(afer Lea and Lauer 1965: pl. 1-3). 


Bary drastic Haymt 18 


sophistication previously unknown in Early Dynastic Egypt, necessitated the creation of a 
ew exeutive post at The head 6f the government apparatus, to oversee all ts activities 
and report directly to the king. The viziers of the Thin and early Fourth Dynasties seen 
to have been royal princes, perhaps younger sons removed ftom the direct line of 
succession Only in the reign of Menkaura was the position ‘opened up’ to a cormmoner 
(Fiusson and Valbelle 199237). 

The tripartite ttle held by a vizier may indicate the threefold nature of his authority: 
The first clement, EB, emphasises he courtly aspect of the office. The iteral meaning of 
rai is ‘he of he curtain", an epithet reminiscent of positions in the Otomman court. ln 
Early Dynastic Egyp, it may have carried an ancient signilîcance of which we are 
unaware. The secoad element, #3, is usually translated "noble, and eas probably no 
more than a general designntion for an official. Somme scholars have inteeprcisd the term 
as expeessing the judicial aspect of the vizierte (Husson and Valbelle 199237) 
cerainly. in lute periods the vizier was the highest legal authority in the land under he 
king, the ultimate coun of appeal (barring an appeal to the king himsel, and the offal 
who decided important legal cases. The third par of the title, 130, cannot be translated, 
but may designate the administrative aspect of he vizier's Office, 1 is perhaps related to 
he ` rot Narmer's reign. The three component elements of the tile may originally have 
been separate and distinct (Husson and Valbelle 199236, but i is equally possible that 
they were used in conjunction fronn dhe very beginning, o describe the highest position in 
he administration. 

"Perhaps as a further indication of rank, viziers of the Old Kingdon generally bore the 
additional tile liirp. £. Ht may be no coincidence that the two eaeliest-knowrn holders of 
fhe tile were buried at Nor Saqqara, overlooking the seat of Early Dynustie 
govemment. lt is tempting 1o identify the owners of all the major tons at Noth 
Suqqars_ineluding S3506 and S3505, eseh built for an rip tas ‘proloviziers’: i 
other won, the officials at the head of the national administration (ef Baines 195:138) 


THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROVINCES 


"Sute contol of the mens of production, achieved through the mechanism of royal 
foundaions, gave the court a rendymade network of instinutions and administrators by 
which 1o exercise political contol over fhe provinces. The system ras best developed in 
he Delta, where the majociy of royal foundations were probubly Iocatad I is thus in the 
context of Lower Egypt that 1he earliest evidence foe regional administration is found. 


Lower Bp 


"At least as ently as the middle of the First Dynasty, the Delta seem to have been divided 
into two for administrative purposes. Sealings fon the tomb of Memeith refer, in one 
case, 10 the “fields of the west’. in anther to the eastern Delta (Peteie 1900: pl. XXIIL3T- 
$; Martin-Parley 1976:17). The administrative division of he Delta was apparently 
ımalatained unl the Third Dynasty as indicated oa a sealing from Beit Khallaf mastaba 
KS, dated to he reign of Netjerikher (Garstang 1902. pl. XXVLS; Weill 1908:86) shen 
ıa widespread reorganisation of regional government seems to have taken place. 


The tiles most closely coanectad swith provincial administration in Second and Third 
Dynasty sources are M3 ht. 3 and < <r (Martin Parley 1976:24, 54, 51) Both seem 
to refer exclusively to localities in Lower Egypt, especially in the weste Delta. The 
Connetioa with the adiministratioa of royal domains and estates is clear. Throughout he 
First Dynasty, the tile ^ mr; ‘administrator, was bone by officials in charge of 
domains anê heir produce. Likewîse, he other tile, hq huf- 4f ‘governor of he reat 
estate’, may originally have designsted the oficial xesponsible for the royal mortuary 
estate, since this is the ikely meaning of wt 37 (Husson and Valbelle 1902-28) 
Alhough, wr is the usual ile or a provincial administrator in the Third Dynasty (r 
example, in the inseription of Metjen), 1t may have been replaced by hq3 hut- 3 1a he 
Old Kingdom when the fomer tile retained purely ranking significance (Martin-Pardey 
1976.43, 54, 45). Since both tiles are oF gest antiquity <r is fist attested in the 
reign of Djet, while a ht 37 is frst mentioned on the stela of Sabef from the rega of 
Qua it is impossible to determine at which point they began to be applied to the sphere 
of provincial administrtion, rather than the management of royal landholdings. 

Developing, as it did, Out of the system of domain administration ~ with both 
ideological anû functional links to the eourt-_provincial government of Lower Egypt 
‘seems 1o have raintained much closer links wilh the residence than did he government 
of he Upper Egyptian regions. During ihe Early Dynastic period and into the Old 
Kingdon ihe regional administrators of the Delta muy have resided at Memphis, eather 
shan in he province(s) for which they had responsibility (Husson and Valbelle 1992-53) 
Even though st the end of he Third Dynasty Metjen was both priest of the local god of 
Letopolis and mr of the Lelopolite nome, there does not appear to have been an 
explicit link between political and paiestly omee i Lower Egypt (Martin-Pardey 
197642. 


Upper Epi 


Evidence for the early administration of Upper Eaypt is extremely, scaree, i has been 
suggested that the ancient ttle FEN ır was held by the ‘govemor of the Upper Egyptian 
segional capital" (Kaploay 1963, 1: 450), hough there is no evidence to support such an 
‘interpretaioa (Martin-Pardey 1976.37), ia the light of recent evidence on Elepkantine, 
an altemative suggestion, that î.V n was the tile of the foresecommander 
Sesponsible foe guafding Egypt's southem frontier (Marin Pardey 1976 38), must also be 
rejected. None the less, a distinetive putters of central coatrol indicated by different 
sites _seems to have evolved for Upper Egypt in the Early Dynastic period, and aspecls 
of this system may have been inherled foam the preceding Predynasie period (Hele 
s48). 

Possibly the earliest ype of local administrator in Upper Egypt was the office of 
“mayor” (Ei J This title ıs est atested oa a sealing form the top of Memneith, where 
itoceur in conjunetion with the name of the oficial Seklh-ka (Peuie 1900: pl. XXIL32). 
The tile recurs oa a Third Dynasty sealing fon Beit Khallaf (Kaplony 1963, II1: f 
324), and he overseer of a mining expedition to the Wadî Maghura ia the reign of 
Sekhemkher also held the title Ki (Gardiner and Peet 1952. pl. 1). {ExeepGonally, the 
ille št. occurs in the context of nome administration in the tomb inseription of 
Pehermefer; he apparently held he office of ‘mayor of the Busiris nome of Lower Eypt 


Bary drastic teyre 120 


[Marin-Padey 1976401) Another ttle applied in the later Third Dynasty to Upper 
Egyptian adeninistators, hq is undoubtedly a very ancient designation of office. ln the 
eign of Den, Setka boce the ttle hq? (Emery 1958: pl. K2.38), though a eoanection with 
provincial administration is not made explicit. A seslkimpression fron a Third Dynasty 
Context at Elephantine mentioas fhe governor (g3) of a locality called i-1 (Kaplony 
1963, Il: figs 282, 285-6; Seidimayer 19966: 121) whilst the governor of the island 
community tself bore the ite ini-r3 3hw, ‘overseer of Elephantine” (Leclant and Clore 
1993.250: Pluzniek. ia Kaiser ef al 1995-181 and 182, fig. 204: Seidhmayer 19960: I13) 
During the course of the Thind Dynasty, the title Aq seems to have been superseded by 
different administrative designation, sir-13. This ts firt attested oa a stone vessel from 
he Step Pyramid galleries (Leu and Lauer 1965: pl. 28.5) and ves the title bome by 
Metjen in coanection with Upper Egy pian regions at ihe end of the Third Dynasty The 

ınsîtioa from he earlier to the later designation seems 1o have been gradual, since both 
sles are atested for the sixteenth Upper Egyprian nome in the Second Dynasty (Martin 
Purdey 1976:63). 

"1n fhe reign of Nejerikhet, the high ofîcial Heirs bore the title wr mw Sn w; 
‘greatest of the tens of Upper Egypt’. This may indicate a position in he provincial 
administration, since in the Sith Dynasty the same tile carried responsibility Or 
conseriptîng men for eoevée labour in the particular diseicts under the official's control 
(Wood 1974:15), Further, it has been suggested thur the variation in he lists of tiles 
carved on the relief panels fromm Hesles's tomb ‘might reflect (his) official functions in 
various geographical districts" (Wood 1978:20). 


The origins of the nome syatem 


As an adminiserative mechanism, the nome systeme—he division of Egypt into regional 
administrative units__allowed the king to appoint trusted officials to various specie 
duties which were easiest to undertake on 3 regional buss, sueh as irrigation and tax 
assessment (Martin-Pardey 1976:22). The names of Lower Egypl, apparently based on 
he location of royal domains, probably originated as colleeion potats for agricultural 
produce destined for the royal treasury (Helck 1954-80). These is considerable 
ncerainiy about whether the some system was originally devised for Lower Egypt oF 
for Upper Egypt. ts main purpose was to allow a tighter, more unifoenm control oF the 
provinces by the state (Martn-Pardey 1976:28) This would probably have been a greater 
coneem with respect to the regions of Upper Egypt, mote distant from the capital and 
traditioaally more independentıninded than the Deka. However, the nome sign itself 
depicts an area of irigated land, and is has suggested to some that The system originuted 
in Lower Egypt The north of the county seems 1o have lacked any weldeîned, pre 

ıexisting political structures, and it was therefore more suited 1o the imposition of a ner 
‘system OF central control by dhe state (Martin-Pardey 1976:25). Moreover, the similarities 
in terminology between he administrıtion o royal domains and the early nome systerm 
tend to suggest a direct link between the wo, 

‘The division of Egypt into nomes clearly oecurmed at some point before the beginning 
ofthe Third Dynasty (Manin-Pardey 1976-18). A sealkieapresston fionı Abydos dating 1o 
he reign of Netjerikhet may show the standard of the eighh Upper Egyptian noone, the 
Thinite nome (Newberry 1909: pl. XXIV; Martin-Pardey 1976:33), suggesting that 


he system was already ia existence. Ink inscriptions on stone vessels fiom the Step 
Pyramid complex, plausibly dated 1o the reign of Nineyer (Hclek 1979:129), show the 
sign of the sixteenth Upper Egyplian nane, as does a sealimpeession fom the torab of 
Khasekhemwey. A fingmentary sealing of Sekhemib fiom the tomb of Peribsen also 
appears 1o show the lower part of a nome standard (Petwie 1901: pl. XXL172. Some 
sseholars have suggested tha The nome system was established as a deliberate policy of 
he early stale at the time of Egypt's political unifiention (Kaiser, quoted in Martin. 
Pandey 1976:29; MartincPardey 1976-19), arguing that a sytem of regional 
administration would have been essential foe the cohesion of the newly unified state 
(Manin-Pardey 197640). Others have linked the origins of the nome sytem to the new 
economic demands created by pyramid-building (Helck, quoted in Martin-Pardey 
197630) The Lauer view may be rejectad since the eurliest cceurrences of nome 
standards predate the beginning of the Third Dynusty, and subsuntal building 
projects which would have required the mobilisation of considerable manpower and 
fesourees_ were undertaken during the first two dynasties, notably the enclosures of 
Khasckhemwry at Hierakoapolis and Abydos 

‘The annals of the Palermo Stone indicate that the biennial “lowing of Horus’ (nus 
“Hr) was an important event in the Wife of the court. One of is functions may hive bees as 
ıa our of inspection, allowing oflicials of the central administration to keep uptodate 
fecords on the agricultural potential of he provinces However, the “following of Horus 
seems not to have occurred during the reign of Dea, and it is likely that an altemative 
‘Syste of tax assessment and economic control would have been required (Martin-Pardey 
1976.334). The nome system may therefore have been devised in Den's reign as 4 
substitute, However, la the absence of any firm evidence for the existence of nomes in 
he First Dynasty, we should probably place the origins of the system somewhere in the 
‘Second Dynasty I is possible thar the court's move t0 Memphis at the beginning of he 
"Secand Dynasty highlighted by fhe relocation of the royal necropolis from Abydos 1o 
Saqqara necesstaled new mechanism for exercising control over the distant provinces 
of Upper Egypt. The experience of administering royal domains in the Dela provided a 
template, and ihe nome syste was devised along the same lines. 


Peripheral regions 


Administration of the desert regions bordering he Nile valley is first attested in the reign 
of Qua. The oficial Merka was both mr smi and 4 rp ami ‘administrator of he 
desert” and ‘controller of the desert" (Emery 1958: pl. 30). One tile may have been 
connected with civil, the ther with military administration (Manin-Pardey 1976:51), 
hough {his cannot be confirmed. Both titles also occur in the reign of Nejenikhet, he 

“amer emit Nitank being mentioned in a roek-cut inscription at 1be tunquoise mines of 
the Wadî Mnghara (Gardiner and Peet 1952: pl. I Clearly, the individual responsible r 
ihe desert approaches to the Sinai would have been an imporant member of a mining 
expedition, I is possible taut Nitankh's position gave hin a degree of authority over he 
‘Sinî as well. At the ed of the Third Dynasty, Pehemmefe’s sphere of responsibility was 
defined more precisely as the western desert: one of his tiles was mr smi imn 
'sdminiarator of the western desert The inscriptions of Meren and Pehermefer suggest 
haf the locality called hf i possibly Kom el Hlisn, may have been the headquarters of 


Barly drastic taye 122 


he desert administer (mr smi). This official would have been responsible 
primarily for the desert region bordering the western Delta (Manin-Purdey 1976:52) 
Which fomed a strategically important bufer zone beeen Egypt and the Libyan 
peoples to he west. 

The distinction ia nomenclature (Husson and Valbelle 1992:62) berwreen, on the one 
hand, the lou desert fringing the Nile valley (anni) anû, oa the other, he high desert and 
foreign lands (h 36 must be signifcant Fromm an admiaistative perspective, the low 
desert valued as a source of minerals and wild game__could be exploted by means of 
ısmallxseale expeditions mounted form the Nile yalley itself The desert ftinges and their 
fesourees could easily have been administered Rom within Egypt, and the ities tested 
iin the Early Dynastic period seen to be proof of is. 


Forelgn conquests 


By contrast, exploitation andlor administration of the high desert and lands outside EYP 
required a more expansionist programe. The imposition of Egyptian control in areas 
disent from the Nile valley could oaly be achieved by transplanting the appropriate 
administrative sıruetures into foreign serniiory. Such a practice may be auested by he 
construction of an Egyption First Dynasty ‘Residency’ at En Besor in southem Palestine. 
The only evidence for Egyptian administrative coalfol over neighbouring lands during 
the Early Dymastie period comes in the form of two seal-impressions from the Shunet ez- 
Zebîb, dated o the reign of Khasekbemwy, which bear fhe Hile imnkr3 % 3u, ‘overseer 
of the foreign land” (Ayan er al. 1904: pl. 1X9: Newbery 1909: pl. XKILIV), The 
‘foreign land" in question is not specified: fon later parallels, territory to the est of 
Egypt ie, the Sinai or souhem Palestine _sras probably indicated. An leıportant piece 
of supporting evidence in this respect is a fragment of stone relief ftom the temple area at 
Hierakonpolis, Also dated to the reign of Khasekhemwry, it lists a number of conquered 
ıterftaries, each name determined by the sign #341. ‘foreign land J is lempling to link 
he appearance of the tile inr3 h s athe end of the Second Dynasty with the start of 
systemic exploitarion of the turquoise reserves in and around Wadi Maghara ia he 
inaî fron the begining of the Third Dynasty. 
‘Inereasing Egyptlan involvement ia neighbouring areas and the imposition of politieal 
ıcniwol over territory outside the borders of Egypt are important indicators of the court's 
rowing confidence and coercive power. The dynamics of Egypt's foreign relations ia he 
yıly Dynastic period are a complex mixture of ideology and practical economics, 
illuminating sane of the problems and priorities which faced Egypt's early rulers. The 
detailed nature of Egypt's contacts with the outside world is explored in the next chapter. 


ON: THE EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY IN EARLY 
DYNASTIC EGYPT 


coNcLus 


The picture presented above represents no more than isolated pieces of a puzzle. Ht is 
unlikely that we will ever understand the precise structure of the Early Dyaustic 
administration, given the imitations of the available evidence (see Figure 46 O am 
educated guess). What is possible at the present time is an iavestigatioa of particular 


aspects of goverment, as practised by the carly Egyptian stale. The cewal theme of this 
Sook, he fashioning of ancient Egypian cvilsatien by the country's carly eulers, 
equines at least an attempt at explaining one further theme under the hesding of 
admiaistation. how authority was exercised by members of the goverment apparanus in 
he fist three dynasties. Here, a final category of evidence is invaluable: the careers of 
prominent individuals. 


ndbtdual careers 


Amongst the large number of seal-inpresions recovered fron the First Dynasty royal 
toba Abydos and the contemporary élite burials at North Seqgars, a few high officials 
are mentioned quite frequently, sormetimes at different stages of their career. A tentalive 
resonsirugion of these careers can be made, illustmting the opporunities for 
sdvancement within the Early Dynastic adminisrntion. From the very end of the Third 
Dynasty, the tomb of Metjen at Saqqara preserved numerous titles held 


Figure 4.6 The structure of Early Dynastic 
‘administration. The chart shows the 
principal departments and functions of 
govemment, together with the titles of 
some of the major administrative officials 
(based upon information from 
comtemporary sources: sealimpressions, 
inscribed stone vessels and Third Dynasty 
tomb inscriptions). 


by its ower during his long career, which probably began in he reign of Hani and came 
o an end carly in the reign of Sneferu. The inscripdons provide valuable informatie 
about many aspects ofthe administeation on the threshold of the Old Kingdom. 


Barly drastic iaymt 124 


Anka 


The career of Amıka {` m-3) seems to have begun in the reign of Djer, spanned the entire 
reign of his suceessot, Djet, and continue nto the early part of Dens reign, when EgYDt 
was under he regency of Merneith, Seal-impressions naming Anka have been found in 
he tombs of all three rulers, Djer, Djct sad Memeith, The different titles associated with 
“Amıka in hese three contexts shed some light on his progression through the ranks of the 
administration. Throughout his career, Amka served in he administration of royal 
domains. In the reign of Djer, he was already involved in managing the dommuin called 
Hirsh oili-. wt and held the tides nbî and (ir) ibn(ı) (Petrie 1901: pls XVL121 and 
XVLL23, sespectively. Ama retained the las of these posiions under Djer's successor 
(Petrie 1900: pl. XIX.10. Ht was in he regency of Merneith, however, hat Amka's career 
seems to have peaked. ln addition 1o his previous ille of n now in the variant foe 
Ap nhl he became a mortuary priest 2h mw-3h ) (Pei 1900: pl XX.18) and an 
administrator (amr) (Petrie 1900: pl XXK-15) He finished his career as district 
administrator ( _ wr of hut iw, the cality in the western Delta which probably lay ia 
fhe vicinity of Kom el-Hisn. Hence, he seems 1o have moved from managing specie 
royal foundations 1o a posiion ia he regional adiministration of the western Delta, the 
area where most of these foundations were probably silale 


Sekhemkasedj 


A second high official whose career spanned more than one reiga is Sekhemkasedj 
(6h w3e almost certainly the oumer of tomb S3504 sat Sagara (f Kaplony 1963, 
1 80, Sealkimpressions ions the tomb, and fromm the burial of DJet st Abydos, iadicnte 

uat îı was under this King that Sekhekasedj began his career, again in the phere of 
administering royal domains. At fist, he held the ile ih nf) (Petrie 1900: pl XVIILS, 
T01: pl. XVILI29) and a parallel title w4 b (Petrie 1900: pl. XVIILS) perhaps 
connected in some way with the town of Elkab, His principal oliice, however, was as 
administrator («mr of Djet's own foundation, the domain W3 -Hr. Sekhemkasej 
retained this responsibility throughout his caree. Indeed, it has even been suggested 
(Kaplony 1963-110) that the domîn was maintained under Mermeith only ‘until 
‘Sekhenkasedj died, then 1o be replaced by a new domain (possibly Hpi 1. During 
he regency of Memeih, Sekhemkasedj was ‘controller’ ( xp) rher than 
“administrator of W3 Hr (Emery 1954-119, f. 163) He also bore his earlier tile 
lh mf) in its later variant b xp nk mf) (Emery 1954:19, fg. 164) and the obscure 
fileh fp nh (Emery 154:120, fig. 165) In addition to his duties conceming he 
domain W3 Hr, Sekhemkasedj ras also connected with a royal estate ht hnn(?) 
(Emery 1954114, f. 159, and towards the end of his career achieved he prestigious 
position of wr ofthe domain Hrs i> w (Emery 1954-116 fig. 151), which seems 
O heve been the most important soyal foundation of the carly First Dynasty 


Hemaka 


Alhough Hemaka (lr3-43) served under caly one king, namely Den, ît is possible to 
Chart something of his career. Kaploay (1963, I: 113) proposed that Hemka may 
originally have managed the domain Hrpirh ¢ as bol administrator ( dmv) and 


controller (i pJ. Later, he seems to have taken control of he more prestigious domain 
Hirsh mii. wa succession 10 the officials Ankhka and Medjedka. Hemka then 
continued to exercise authority with respect to both domains unl the end of his career 
The peak ot Hemaka's achievement must have come with his appointment as royal 
chneellor (i amv hi, the position at he head of the ueasury. He seems to have made 
ihe leap from a career connected with the management of royal domains to being he 
king's own seal-bearer and thus the acknowledged representative of royal authority. The 
size and wealth of Hemaka's tomb at Nor Saqqara (Emery 1938) is an eloquent 
testament to the position he achieved by the end of his life 


Mejen 


From the disposition of the many titles throughout his torab chapel, it may be possible to 
reconstruct something of Metjen's career (Goedieke 1966). Certainly, the test ites, 
ıinseribed on the walls of an unfinished section of the tomb, relate 10 a temple of Snefen 
and a mortuary estate of Huni, both in the Letopolile nome (the second Lower Egyptian 
nome). The autobiographical inseription contains a rare pice of direct evidence for 
Career progression: Mletjen states that he became district sdmlaistratoe { ` 00) of he 
Xolle nome (the sixth Lover Egyptian nome) after he had been #30 and hrî.aqr of he 
same nome. Whether this represented a common pattern of promotioa is, of course, 
impossible to ascertain without compurarive evidence. However, it does iadieute That an 
oficial employed in the adڀminiraon‎ of a region could expect to advance within that 
ısdministrion, even as far as the top job. 


Merka: a hig ofielal of the late First Dynasty 


Merk was buried in an iie Iomb at Noth Saqqora, mash S3505, in he reign of Qa, 
he ls Ging of he First Daas The funerals sila of Moka (Emery I958: pl S9) 
presents the most evtenaive lt o ites held by a single dividual i the Early Dynaunie 
Ferid. The combination of administesuive, eoufîy an religious tiles teli us something 
if aot about he precise Senarcstion of responsibilties within the Early Dyuast 
goverment, then about the lcs and oftiees which gave an dividual status within the 
Thee Gilles are writen larger than the rest and appear directly above Merka's name. 
We may take Lene to be e Giles considered most lmxportant by the daceaned hinmtelf. 
sand defelore 1o have indicated most clearly Bis mak within the highes sebelons of the 
Sate (Baines 1905:1323) Surprisingly, perhaps, o ofthe tree tiles are religious: m1 
and som. The fin, usually translated solst, was held in ler periods by the pies who 
Clothe ihe cult suamue of a god (Faulkner 1962.227). ks significance a ihe ead of the 
Frnt Dynasty is enieely unknown. The (Jur prie was sppeareniy closely connected 
wih he celata 0f royal inal, amd tle tile may sddtisnally have desigraled he 
ngs son. was apparenlly e ant iporant sile held by Nerka and appear 
immediuely before his name. In other words, despite oceupying a number of 
Mialsuatlve Oita poskkons connccied wi the royal household (artailel belo 
erka gained hi exceptiooal unut_refacted in tae ice ad saplinicatiot of bis oath, 
eomplene with is own funerary chapel fom an ancient Rilgious function song 


Early dynastic teyre 126 


associated with The cult of divîne kingship. This fact speaks eloquently about he ultimate 
source of power and authority in Early Dynastic Egypt That Merka was a member of the 
foyal family is probebly indicted by the third ite, which appears between s3 and 
om. This is the designation iriye 1. which marks erka as a member of the group of 
royal kinsmea that constituted he ruling élite in the Fist Dynasty. 

"Merk 's remaining titles are writen ia two columns, although the nudimeatary carving 
and amıngement of the signs at this early period make precise identifienuion dificult 
Religious dfles include a posible coaneeion with he cult o Anubis, an obscure 
reference to the scorpion (a cutie object attested in other Early Dynastic sources), and 
ra F NE. "priest OF Neith'. The association between the godless Neth and the royal 
family is well anestel in the Fit Dynasty (see Chapter $, and provides yet another 
indication hat Merka was a close member of the King's immediate circle. Specie 
administrative oîces are cotparatively few, suggesting as indicated earlier _that 
status came fiom proximity to Ihe King rather than fom occupying particular positions 
within the apparatus of government. Apart fron two obscure references to the ‘oflice’ (i 
and a possible reference to the organisation of ples, Merka's pûimary admiisiralive 
fupcgon was as *isict administrator of he desert ( mv amî). The sphere of 
authority of such a poskion is not known, but it may have entailed responsibility of 
guarding EgypI's desert frontiers as well as administrtion of the deserts themselves, their 
ihabicunts and resources (notably stones snd minerals). Whether Merka ever carrisd out 
ısuch duties in perso cannot of course be gauge, but it seenms somewhat unlikely that an 
Ofîcial bused ut fhe capital srould have had much direct contact with he desert regions 
over whieh he exercised nominal authority. A further title (% xp Wt) may indicate 
administrative responsibility or the region of the Hare-nome, later the fîfloenth nome of 
Upper Egypt, whieh included the important travertine quarries at Hamub. His possible 
haî this combination of regional adiinistrative authority for the desert(s) and the Hare. 
nome reflects sespoasibiliey, above all, for The peocuremenr and supply of raw teras 
for ihe stoneccuters of the royal workshops. The other Giles held by Merka concern 
funcons within the soyal household, once again indicating his membership of the 
imermost cirele of the court Hence, he was a “follower of the King’ Kins-atw) and 
‘controller of the soyal bark” (r rp win) the latter being a position which must 
have been closely involved with royal visi and the periodic ‘following of Horus. As we 
shall see, these wo types of event were important means by which the doctrine of divine 
Kiagship wras promulgated, and by whieh newly won poltlesl contyol over the whole of 
FEaypt was maintained and bolstered. The titles ‘comptroller of the palace’ (i rp. 4) and 
‘eompuoller of the uudienee ckaniber? £ xp s8) may have been purely honorary, or they 
may point io Merka having effeetively controlled access to the person of the King; this 
Would have given him great poliical influence in a county where ihe King was he 
ulimate source of authority. Finally, an apparent reference 10 singers finrw) (Emery 
1958:31) cannot be canîrmed, since the stela is damaged at this polat 

In summary, Merka's tiles reflect a society and an administrative system in which the 
king was at ihe pinnacle, both ideologically and politically. The stela of Merka adds 1o 
he impression taut, aside om the departments of government responsible for state and 
foyal iacomehe weasury and is sub depaments, royal foundations and the pret 
Early Dynastic administration was pefhaps rather loosely organised, lacking precise 
demarcation of responsibilities. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
FOREIGN RELATIONS 


Ancient Egyptian chilisation has traditionally been viewed as a civilisation apart 
“Separated from the rest of the ancient world by the effective natural borders of the easlerm 
and western deses and the Mediterranean Sea, the Nile valley fostered a distinctive, and 
in many ways unique, culture. The comparison and contrast of ancient Egypt with iis 
neighbouring civilisation, Mesopotamia, is 8 milla theme for ancient historians 
However, o the Egyptologists working cartier this ceotury, he surviving archaeological 
melerial hom the begionings of Egyptian civilisation suggested much closer contacls 
between these two great cultures. Particularly stiking to archaeologists ike Petrie and 
Emery were the many borrowings Rom Mesopotumlan iconography manifest o the 
ıcarliest royal objects from Egypt. Coupled with fhe extrsordinary explosion of crentivity 
and organisational skill whieh seemed 10 have secured st the very inception of the 
Eytan stu, the artistic evidence prompted these scholars to advance the theory of the 
‘Dynastic race’ (Derry 1956; Emery 1961:3940). Aa invasion of people fro lands to 
he east, superioc to the indigenous Predlynastic Egyptians, was proposed as the driving 
force behind he foundation of the Egy pian stale and the emergence of ‘classic’ Egyplian 
civilisation, By the 1970s this theory had been largely diseredited, smuialy due 1o the 
results of subsequent archueologieal work at ses dating to the Predynastic period. These 
demonsteated the long and indigenous development of anany of Egyptian civilisation's 
most distinctive features, Moreover, hey proved that the processes of craf specialisation, 
seate formation and arisic formalisation had begun many centuries before the beginning 
of the First Dynasty, in the emergent territories of Upper Egypt. Over the last twenty 
years, the intensive investîgaion of Ekyp!'s origins kas enhanced our understanding of 
hese peocesses immeasurably. Studies have all tended 1o stress, explicitly of implic 
he indigenous genius of Egyplian civilisation, eager 10 claim originality and 
independence fo the achievement of Nile valley culture (ef. Kantor 1965-12-13) 
However, discoveries made within he last few yeas, particularly at Bul and Abydos, 
provide tantalising glimpses of a rather different picture of early Egypt. There is a small, 
but growing body of evidence to suggest that the birth of Egyptian civilisation may, afer 
sall, have owed a signiticant amount to other neighbouring cultures, particularly those of 
thc ancient Kear East (see Map 2 for location of sites). In light of this new and immensely 
exciting evidence, X is perhaps time to begin a xeappeaisal of early Egyp®s place in the 
ancient world, the extent and intensity of Egyptian interaction with neighbouring 
Cultures, and the influence of those cultures on the developmeat of Egyptian civilisation. 


THE NEAR EAST AND EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN 


Relarlons wlth southe Palestine 


Tere is some evidence for sporadic contacts between Egypt and southemm Palestine as 
early as the Badarian and Naqada 1 periods, the Chalcolithie in southem Palestine (Prag 


Barly drastic taye 128 


1986: Marfoe 1987:26, Ben-Tor 1991:34; Ward 1991:13). However, intensive contacts 
between The o regions do not seen to have begun until Iter in the Predynastic period. 
Direet Egyptian involvement in southern Palestine scents to have occurred in two phases, 
separated by an imerening period of reduced Egyptian activity in the region (Gophaa 
1902; Hartung 1994), The fist phase occurred during the EBla period in southerm 
Pulestine (Harrung 1904:1089), whic comespands 1o he beginning of the Nagas 1l 
period in Upper Egypt (Amira and Giophna 1992), From this time, there is evidence of 
Faypian seers, belonging o the Lower Egyptian culural sphere (Gophna 902b: 384 
9, fg. 4; Porat 1992435; Hartung 199:108), at a few sites in southers Palestine: Sie H 
Ji the Wadî Gihozzeh (Goplna 1990,1992), Tau Ihbeiach (Oren and Yekutieli 1992), 
Nizzaninı (Goplına 1990), Lachish (CGophaa 1976, 192b; Oren and Gilead 1981; Brundl 
1992 plus references) and Tel Erni (Weinstein 1984; Kempinski 1992). 

From the middle of Naqada Il (Naqada He) unl the end of the Predynastie period 
(Naqada IIb" Dynasty 07) the evidence for an Egyptian presence in souhem Palestine is 
greatly reduced (Hartung 1994:109-11). A small population may have remained at Tour 
Rhbeineh and Tel Erni, but even here the percentage of Egyptian pottery declines 
markedly compared 1o the previous phase (Hartung 194:109). There is a clear hiatus in 
he En Besor area between the Egyptian activity at Site H (in EBla) and the resumption of 
an Egyptian presence at nearby En Resor (in late EBID), Interestingly, it is precisely 
during this period of reduced Egyptian iavolvement in southems Palestine that imports 
“from the Near East are most numerous in Egyptian contexts, the most dramatic example 
being the hundreds of imported vessels found ın tomb Uj st Aoylos. So rade between 
ıe two areas was clearly maintained (ef. Amira 1985). The evidence points to a major 

salignmnent OF Egyptian- Palestinian contacts during ihe Kaqada II and early Naqoda 11l 
periods, when the courts of Upper Egypt were expanding heir poliical and economic 
uence (Hartung 19940). 


Colomisation 


The very end of the Predynastie period (late EBIb in the Palestinian chronology) 
wimessed a resumption of direct Egyptian involvement in southern Palestine, but on a 
much larger scale than befoce. This development is undoubtedly liaked to the process of 
‘state formation that was resching its culmination in Egypt during ‘Dynasty 0 (Marfoe 
1987:26). Instead of small-scale trade, perhaps involving middlemen, ıe Egyptians seem 
to have engaged in larger, more frequent, state-sponsored expeditions into southern 
Palestine (Morey 1987.43), These were supported by minor way-stations along the north 
îna coast, trading-stations, caravanrserais and even permanent setlements in southern 
»alestine itself (Mlarfoe 1987:26 Oren and Yekuteli 1992-381), This extension of the 
‘eoee’ into the ‘periphery for a restricted period of ime is part of a zeneral phenomenon 
associated wilh the Fae of eurly stules. The establishment of ‘colsaies” would clearly 
have allowed the Egyptians to gather resources and contol irade more effectively. More 
wenty sites in souherm Palestine have produced clear evidence of an Egyptian 
presence (Brandl 1992; Hartung 1994). This inehudes pottery and flint tools, made loeally 
om local materials but in 3 charsctedistically Egyptian style and using Egyptian 
techniques (Ben-Tor 1991:56), Buildings constructed i» an Egyptian manner _at En 
Besor (Gophna and Gazit 1985), Afidar (Brandl 1992-449) and perhaps Tel Maahaz 


(Gophna 197633; Brandl 1902464)—and sealkimpressions made locally (Porat 1992) 
point to an official Egyptian administrative presence st certala sites, presumably acting 
under orders fiom a royal court back home (Giophna 192b: 393), As one leading scholar 
has commented, «it is diffieul to avoid the conclusion that southern Cantan...ûin bte 
EBID)...was highly Egyptlanizedî (Gophna 192b: 386 

Tel Eran is a key ste for understanding Egypt's relations with southem Palestine 
during he Early Bronze Age. The sie hus produced a rich assemblage of imported 
Faypilan and locally made Eyprianising pouery (Weinsıein 198461) One vessel 
figment was found bearing the incised serek of Narmer. Khas been shown that the 
evidence or destruction layers at Tel Eran, previously interpreted as signs of Egyptian 
military activigy, was illusory (Weinstein 1984:67). None the less, evidence for Egyptian 
Contacts wilh the site goes back to the Naqada HI perid (EBls-b The Egyplian pottery at 
“Tel Erani suggests a continuous Egyptian presence from this imme until at least the lanet 
pertok tne First Dynasty. 

Another she of Key importance is En Besor (Goplhna and Giozit 1985; GGophına 1990, 
1902a, 199b). On a low hil overlooking the En Besor springs, Israeli archaeologists 
excavated a unique brick building, named Building A. lt was constructed entirely of 
mudbriek, without stone foundations, and coasisted of several rooms and courtyards 
covering total area of some 85 square metres. Some of the walls were preserved up to a 
height of five courses of mmudericks. Although the bricks were made from the local loess 
ısoil, with the addition of large amounts of sand, their dimensions and the pattern ia which 
hey were laid have no parallels from comtemporary southern Palestine. Rather, they are 
characteristic of Egyptian mudbciek constuction of the Early Dynastic period, in 
particular he First Dynasty dite tombs at Noth Saqqara, Furermmore, the building as » 
whole, which gives the impression of having been buil 10 a preconceived plan, is aligned 
nartlrsouth, a4 was comtnon in Egyptian bullding practice (Giophna and Gazit 198529) A 
Saienee statuette of a baboon found in a rubbish pit confirms the Egyptian charcter of the 
sile (Goplha 1992). Fran the installations found inside the building _ including a large 
pottery basin sunk into the floor of one room and a quer emplacement in the adjoining 
Dom and from the huge quantities oF bread-moulds found scattered throughout the sil 
it appears that bread and beer were manufactured on the premises (Gophna and Gazî 
985-12-13), Whilst many of the storage vessels found af the site had been kamported 
fiom Egypt, he domestic pouery (for cooking, cating and drinking) was all manufactured 
locally, secording 10o Egyptian ceramic traditions but fon locally obtained clays. This 
indicates that “ihe local Egyptian population was large and lived away fiom heir 
homeland long enough 1o establish independent podery workshops, operated by poders 
seained in the Egypêan tradition” (Port 1992434), Akhough ir may have served a an 
observation polat, Building A lseked any defensive features and could only accoamodate 
about a dozen people. The likeliest explanation for the building's function is thar i¢ served 
as a stagingpost on the trade roule between Egypt and soulherm Palestine, providing 

supplies (water, beend and beer) for he passing Egyplian trade caravans, Indeed, 
a reason for the location of the facility at En Hesoc seems to be the local 
availability of fresh water. The building no doubt affoeded the Egyptians contol over the 
Springs, which peovided ihe richest and most stable perennial wster source 10 be found in 
e entire southern coastal plain’ of Palestine (Gophns and Gazit 1985:15). Numerous 
ımud-sealings, many of which bear recognisably Egyptian inscriptions, were found ia a pit 


Bary dynastic Haymt 110 


outside the building's main entrance (Gophna and Gazit 1985:13), They can be dated to 
he First Dynasty, although hece is some disagreement about whether a date carly or late 
in he Dynasty is more probable, The excavator dates the Egyptian presence at En Besor 
to ihe very beginning of the Fit Dynasty (Gophna 19924). Alhough several of he 
ısealings can be dated on stylisic grounds to the eign of Aha, parially preserved royal 
ames on others seen 10 indicate a later duve. Three sealings show traces Of the names Of 
Dict (no. 42), Den (no. 26) and Anedjib (no. 35) while a fourth (no. 39) may oace have 
included the tame of Semeskhet. A further sealing (no. 46) would seem to offer a more 
secure example of Aaodjis's name (Schulman 1983-250), As the archeological stratum 
associated wih the seslings is riher thin, t is unlikely that the building was oceupied 
over a very long period of time. It is therefore possible that the royal names preserved in 
he seslings do not sefer to the reigns Themselves, but rather to royal estates or 
foundurons which supplied he building at En Besor with supplies, In any case, the 
epigraphic evidence from the En Besor seslings indicates that the staging-post was most 
active during the mid-late First Dynasty (Schulman 183:251). The fact that the sealings 
were made fom local clays (the same clays used lo make Eyptisn-style pottery) is of 
geal importance, as it indicates that Egyplian officials were bused st En Besot, murking 
sealed goods according o standard Egyplan administrative peactiee. 

"A similar siuation seems to have evisted at another she in the northem Negev, Nahal 
“Tillah on the Halif Terrace (Levy c1 al 1995). Here, st the socalled ‘Silo she’, large 
numbers of inponed Egyptian vessels have bew excavated, including late Predyastie 
"Late ware” and Early Dyustic storage jars (Levy et al. 1995:28). A small faience jar and 
clay sealimpeessions confm the Egyplian nauure of the assemblage (Levy e1 al 
199528). A possible public storage ares (associated with a cireular feature which may 
have been a silo) (Levy er al. 1995-30) yielded a sher fron an imported Egyptian vessel 
(Levy ef al. 1995:32, incised before firing with he serek of Narmer (Levy e1 aL 
1995:31). The stratum in which the shend was found has bee dated to late EBIb (Levy e 
wal 1995:29), known from other sites to be comtemporary with the reign of Narmer. The 
Nahal Tillah sike amay therefore have been another administrative cente for he late 
PredynasticEarly Dynastic Egyptian presence in southern Palestine, or, at The very least, 
one of a network of trading ses distributed throughout the region. 

The nance of Egypt's involvement ia southem Palestine may be gauged Rom several 
pieces of evidence. The large number of Mint objects recovered from sites showing an 
Efgpiian pcesence do not include any arrowheads (Ben-Tor 1991:8) This argues against 
an Egyptlan military presence, suggesting instead that trade was the primary purpose of 
he setlements, It has been estimated that the number of Egyptians living permanently in 
southern Palestine during the Early Bronze 1 period may have reached several hundred 
(Ben-Tor 1991:4) The raw materials which they sought probably inchaded honey, wine, 
Jbiumen and resin, as well as various coniferous woods (Ben-Tor 1991:8, Wand 1901:14 
16) with the exception of cedar, the southem limit of which appears 10 have been Mt 
Hermon on the present-day Iracli-Lebunese border (Ward 1991:14) The apparent 
imensiy of Egypian acivity ia souhem Palestine in the reign of Narmer sherds 
incised vith his serekl have been found st Tell Arad (Aiean 1974, 1976) and Tel Erni 
(see above) as wel as at Nahal Tillah seems to represent he end of the secoad phase of 
Eqyptlan setllement in the region. Aer the early First Dynasty (EBI) the evidence 
pols to a marked decline in Egypes contacts wih southern Palestine (Hartung 


1904:112). The Egyptian presence at En Besor seems to have bee maintained at least 
uniil the reign of Anedjb, but contacts wilt other sites in the region decrease 
dramatically. The Sinai coastal route to Palestine apparently fell ioto disuse 

time, no doubt linked to this reductioa in Egyplan activity (Ben-Tor 1991 
owing authority and independence of southern Palestinian cities may have been a 
factor, whilst an increase ia maritime trade may have released the Egypuians from their 
dependence on southem Palestine as souree of commodities (Brandl 1992447-8). The 
fundamental change in Egyptian relations with southem Palestine mirrors developments 
in Nubia (see below). Instead of a ‘broad border-zone oecupied by intermixed Egyptian 
and aative tradingposts and villages” in fhe northern Sinî and souhem Palestine 
(Seidlmayer 196b: 113), Egypt seems to have adopted a more exploitative and hostile 
waritude. This is reflected ln military campaigns whieh axe recorded liom the beginning of 
he First Dynasty. 


Military activig 


Given the ek of any evidence for a military aspect to the late Predynastic and First 
Dynasty Egyptian presence u southem Palestine, the campaigns launched by EgypI's 
early rulers perhaps amounted to nothing more than a series of occasional, punitive raids 
designed 1o ensure the continued cooperation of the local populace. N has been 
suggested that the Kammer Palette records a military campaign against Palestine. The 
determinative accompanying one of the King's slain enemies does indeed bear a close 
resemblance 1o a ‘desert Kite", a stone-walled eaclosune used by the nomadic shepherds of 
‘southern Palestine, I is possible, herefore, that The canapaigns undertaken by the King 1o 
secure the borders of his newly unified realm included a skirmish with the people on 
Ely 's noah easterm bondoc, More certain evidence for Narmmer's dealings wilh Palestine 
is providnd by a fragment of inscribed ivory from his tomb complex at Abydos (B17). 
shows a bearded man of Asiatic appearance, wearing a curious pendulous head dress and 
ıa long. dappled robe, The man holds a brunch of plant in onc hand and is depicted in & 
stooping posture, perhaps paying homage to the Egypûan king (Petrie 1901: pl IV.4-5). 
There are contemporary inscriptions suggesting military campaigns against ‘he 
Asiaties" by several Early Dynastic Kings (Figure 5.1). An ivory label of Den originally 
anachel to a pair of his sandals_from his tomb at Abydos shows the king smiting « 
kneeling captive (Amdlineau 1899: pl. XXXI: Spencer 1980:65, pls 49, 53 [Cat. 460], 
1993:87, ig 6T) The caption can be translated as First time of siting the eastermer(s)', 
hough ihe label could recoed a rial event rater than an actual campaign. The 
idenilîcatien of he conquered enemy is further aided by details of the local landscape 
whieh are depicted behind the capûve, The sandy, hilly topography coalirms the location 
ofthe campaign as the arid lands to he north-east of Egypt, in other words the Sinai or 
southem Palestine. The oceunece of Den's name at En Besor (see shove) coafims 
Egyptian activity in southem Palestine during his reign. Further evidence that Den carried 


Barly drastic taymt 112 


Figure 5.1 Campaigns against southern Palestine. 
Iconographic evidence for Egyptian 
aggression (real or ideological) against 
lands to the north-east: (1) year label of 
king Den from Abydos, bearing the legend 
“First time of smiting the cast(emers) 
(after Spencer 1980. pl. 53, cat. 460); (2) 
J(4) year labels of Den referring to the 
destruction of enemy fortresses, 
presumably in southern Palestine; on the 
most complete label, the reference to the 
destruction of a fortress is at the right 
hand side of the second register (afer 
Petrie 1900: pl. XV.16-1%; (5) fragment 
of stone relief from a building at 


Hierakonpolis erected under 
Khasekhemwry, giving the names of 
(conquered?) foreign localities (afer 
Quibell and Green 1902: pl. XXII, 
bottom). Not to same scale. 


out campaigns against Westen Asia is provided by four fragmentary year labels fromm 
Abydos (Petrie 1900: pl. XV-16-1%, 1902: pl. XLS). They fall ito two puirs of similar or 
identical inseriptions. Each mentions a focified oval enclosure, precede by the sign wp. 
‘open, probably with the meaning ‘hresch" (ef. Weill 1961:21). On one type of label, the 
enclosure is labelled as wf, a word which can be translated as ‘stonghold' Rom iis 
ıeccurrence in the Old Kingdon Inscription of Weni (Sene 1903103, line 12; Lichtheinm 
1975:20; ef. Weill 1961:18). Like he wnt destroyed by Weni, the strongholds) 
breached by Den probably lay in nartherm Sinai or southem Palestine. The other two 
enclosures, oa the second type of label, are named as 3 a oc, more simply, 3r lis 
tempting 10 interpeet this as he Semitic won “En” Ain: well" (Weill 1961-21), sefereing 
to a settlement founded st the site of a spring (for example, En Besod In each case the 
enclosure is shown breched oa one side, and the hoe depicted next to it probably 
symbolises destruction. The presence of Palestinian vassals or captives at the Egyplian 
oya court is again hited sf ter ia the First Dynasty, An ivory gaming-tod ftom the 
toaib of Qua at Abydos shows a bound Asiatic captive. The hieroglyphs above his head 
wcleariy label hin as an inhabitant of $ 2 (SyriacPalestine) (Petrie 1900: pl XIL12-13-pl 
XVIL30) 

At fhe end of the Second Dynsty, sealings of Sekhemib include the epithet inv 
hı 3k ‘conqueror of a foreign land" (or, atematively, ‘foreign bute’), suggesting 
military setvity oa Egypt's ontiers. A sealing of Perbsen humm his 1ommb at Abydos 
bears the similar epithet iw S 1, ‘conquerortibute of Setjet. Whilst Sejet usually 
signifies SyriacPalestine, the determinative ia {his case is the town sign, rather than he 
sign for ‘foreign land. This suggests That Sejet was a locality on Egypt's norlresstes 
Border, possibly Sethroê. The late Second Dynusty witnessed fundamental changes in 
Ezypt's relationship with Palestine. ln the reign of Khasekhemwy an oficial is attested, 
or lhe first tine, with the title iml.7(3) A dut. *overseer of foreiga lands. this refers 
to souberm Palestine rather than the Sinai (see below), it iadientes that a new era had 
begun in Near Easter geo-poliics, Egypt was now secure enough within its own borders 
ıo place its dealings with Palestine on a proper administrative footing. 


Imports from Syrit-Palestine in the Early Dynastic period 


"His likely that he luertive and important rade with southera Palestine remained a state 
monopoly throughout she Early Dynastic period. The preservation of such a monopoly 
ımay have been ene of the factors which contributed 10 the further centralisation of he 
state during the first three dynasties (Marloe 1987.26-$). An idea of the volume of Early 
Dynastic irade may be gained ffons the huge quantities of copper found in some élite and 
royal burials of the First and Second Dynasties, Tomb S3471 st North Saqqara, dating 1o 
ihe feign of Djer, contained some 700 copper objects, ineluding 75 “ingots (Marfoe 
1981:26). A smaller bur similar hoard was found in the tomb of Khusekhemwy at 


Barly drastic teyre 14 


Abydos, By the Fifth Dynasty, copper had become sufficiently common for a long drain: 
pipe to be made of the metal for Sahura's funerary complex (Marfoe 1987-26). 

The other main archaeological evidence for trade contact beewreen Egypt and the Near 
East in the Early Dynastic period consists of large number of imported Sy1o-Palestiaiun 
vessels found in royal and private tombs, particularly during the mid-late First Dynasty 
(Adams and Porat 1996). Precise parallels excavated in lsrsel have helped to confirm the 
cormelation between the First Dynasty in Egypt and the EBII period in Palestine, one of 
he bestaltesied chronological connections in Near Eastern archaeology (Bourriaw 
1981:128). Imported Syro-Palestinian vessels were fist identified in Egypt by Pete in 
he royal tombs of Der, Den and Semerkhet al Abydos, and were us nicknamed 
Abydos ware’, ln fact, this group of foreign potery comprises three disinct wares, The 
frst, and most commen, is a rek-poliched ware characterised by a drab or brown fabric 
with gritty mineral inclusions, fired a relatively low temperatures. The second type is a 
ware wil a disinctive metallic cing, produced by high fring; the surface may be plain, 
bumished, luxice-bumishal oc combed The third and rarest ware is of a similar fabeie to 
he redl-polishel ware, but lightface or whikwslipped, with pained geometric designs in 
brown or red (Kantor 1965:15). Painted ware is not found in Egypt before the reign of 
Den (Adams and Poet 1996:98), and is most common in contexts dating to the end of the 
First Dynasty. The first two wares are diagnostic for EBIL Palestine, Byblos and other 
souhem Syrian sles. Comparative petrographle analysis of vessels from Egypt and the 
Near East indicates that these wares were probably manufseturel in northern Israel oe the 
Lebanon, ia the vicinity of Mt. Hermon (Adams and Porat 196:102). Although the light- 
feed ware also oceurs, sporadically, in Phase CG of he Amuq sites in northern Syria, it 
too seems lo have ociginated in Palestine, probably in Lower Cîalilee ia the vicinity of 
Lake Kimmeret (Adams and Pocat 1996:1014). k seems, therefore, that the conbination of 
pottery Iypes feptesented by these imports was charscieristic for Palestine and the Syrian 
Coast, regions which were connected By both land and sea routes to Egypt (Kantor 
1965:16). The appearance of palated ware ia Egyptian cootexts fiom the reign of Den 
onwards may indicate a shif ia paterms of trade, with Palestine playing an enhanced role 
Compared to lhe situation earlier in the First Dynasty 

Imported vessels in Egypt occur in a range of shapes, suggesting that hey may have 
been used to transport a variety of conumodities (Bourmiau 1981-128) Oils and aromatic 
resins were probably amongst the most insportant irade goods (O'Connor 1987:33), and a 
ferge vessel excavated at Abu Rawash was found 1o coatin û hard black substance, 
îdenlified as resin (Klasens 1961:13) Scientifie analysis__by gas chromatography mas 
spectromey of the coatens of vessels from the tomb of Djet indicates that vegetable 
oils were a major imported commodity. However, one vessel apparently contained resin 
from a member of the pine family, hough ir is impossible 1o Ndenûfy the species more 
precisely (Serpieo and White 1996) The vast rmujoriy of imported Syro-Palestinian 
ponery comes fom sites in Lower Egypt, notably North Saqqara. This is not s0 
Surprising, given the greater proximity of norlhem sites to the Near Eastern trade routes. 
The few imported vessels from Upper Eeypt derive exclusively fiom the royal burial 
complexes at Abydos Obviously, here was no difficulty for he king and the royal court 
iin acquiring importa cormmmodities (especially if foreign trade was a royal monopolY) 
‘Alogeher, some 124 complete or fragmentary Syro-Palestinian vessels are known fromm 
Early Dynastic Egyptian comets, plus several dozen umrestorable fragments, Two-thirds 


ofthe vessels (BI) come from tombs dating to the reign of Den. The others range in date 
fiom the very carly First Dynasty, probably the reign of Narmer (roan Abu Rawa tonıb 
389 [Klasens 1958:37-8]), 10 he Secoad Dynasty, with a particular cluster at the end of 
he First Dynasty in he reigns of Semekhet and Qua C9 vessels). The apparent 
ıconeenirton of imports in the reign of Den is more likely to be a reflection of he large 
number of elite burials of this date, rather Than evidence for an upsurge in trading 
activity, although the later possîbilily cannot be ruled out. Similarly, the paucity of 
idence for tade with the Near East aller the end of the First Dynasty is probably due, 
1o a large exlent, to the relatively small nuıber of lite burials whieh can be securely 
dated to the Second and Third Dynasties (Kantor 1965:17). The single imported vessel 
fiom a Second Dynasty tomb at Helwan suggests thur trade contacts did continue, albeit 
perhaps at a reduced level. Egyptian and Fyplianising objects of Second Dymasy date 
fiom Ai in southern Palestine provide further evidence for the continuity of irade between 
he Two regions (Kantor 1965:16), as do he Syro-Palestinian imports found ia Old 
Kingdom contexts 

‘hn addition to the excavated vessels, hese is also a limited amount of repeesentational 
evidence foc Palestinian vessels in Early Dynastic Egypt. An ivory ftagment hom he 
tomb complex of Narmer st Abydos (B17) depicts a servant carrying on his hend a 
distinctive Palestinian ledgeand loop-handled vessel (Petrie 1901: pl IIA.2. Another 
ivory piece from the royal mortuary complex of Nanmer's successor Aha shows a 
similaly bearded man carying a loop-handicd jar of Palestinian fom (Pevie 1901: pl 
IV. The her side of this ietensive rade is atested at Tell Arad, where laege numbers 
of imported First Dynasty Egyplian vessels have been excavate (Kantor 1965:16), 
including a jarfagment incised with he senet of Narmer (Amin 1974, 1976). 


Changing pattems of trade and the rise of Byblos 


Towards the end of the Second Dynasty, the intensity of Egyptian trade with southern 
Palestîne__which had been a continuous feature of Egypl's foreign relations for over half 
ıa millennium seems to have diminished very markedly. This development nay be 
connected with he sise of urban polities in southern Palestine at about the samme time. 
Alhough the trade in certala commodities, notably copper and birumen, may have been 
maiatained, evidence for direct Egyptian lavolsement la southern Palestine during the 
Old Kingdom is practically non-existent (Ben-Tor 1991-5) The autobiography of Weni, 
fiom the Sixth Dynasty, suggests that punitive raids persisted. These may have been 
inspired by a desire 10 maintain secess to or control raw rnuterials, certainly, the 
gathering of booty was an important aspect of such campaigns, However, the formal 
Commercial arrangements which rust hive charsetecised Early Dynastic elaions had 
clearly undergone major changes (Marfoe 1987.26). 

“The most important factor behind this new pattern of interzegional contacts is likely 
to have been the fise of the Lebanese littoral, and in particular the port and hinterland of 
Byblos, as the new focus OF Egypl's trading laterests. is likely that the establishment of 
segular trade with Byblos made the impor of goods Rom southem Palestine redlundant 
and brought Egyptian ties with the region largely to an end. The Byblos region could ovr 
provide Egypt with all the rav materials required, both those previousty obtained fron 
Southern Palestine and other pıoducts, notably cedar logs. The first definite evidence Of 


Barly dynastic teyre 116 


Early Dyaustic Egyptian contact vith Byölos is a fragment of a beecels stone vessel from 
he area of the Egyplian temple. It is incised with the words H sh mw dî nh 
‘Khasekhemwry, given life, and suggests that some sort of direet coatıet between the 
port and Egypt may have been established at the end of the Second Dynasty. Possible 
support for 1his view may be provided by he fleet of boats buried adjacent to the Shunet 
ezZebîs at Abydos, Khasekhemny's funerary enclosure, discovered ia 1991. Although 

lysis of he wood has yet 1o be carried out, it must be at least a possibility that the 
large quantities of timber involved indicate he begtanings of the limber trade with 
Byblos. 

The first definitely attested use of Lebanese cedar in Egypt is in the construction of 
Khuf's funerary boats in the Fourth Dynasty at Giza. The earliest surviving inscription 
referring to cedar rom Byblos dates 1o the reign 0f Khuf's predecessor Snefen (Schafer 
‘1902:30; Ben-Tor 1991:4) The traditional view that cedar was used in Early Dynastic 
ıtoebs, aad indeed in Predynastie burials, cannot be supported, since none of the pisces of 
wood concemed has been unequivocally identifed as Lebunese cedar (Ben-Tor 1991-4; 
contra Hoffman 1980-270) Indeed, it is quite possible that coniferous woods reached 
Predynastie Egypt fiom Noth Afican or more local sources (Moorey 1987:41). Precise 
identilîcation was olen impossible, due to the small size and conditioa of the specimens. 
In fhe case of the large beams employed in the construction of he First Dynasty royal 
ioaibs at Abydos, the photograph Of one plank suggests that the wood ras in ct pelt 
(Ben-Tor 1991:4), which oecurmed naturally within Egypt. It is probable that most of he 
early pieces refered 1o by the excavators ss cedar were i fact other coniferous woods 
(euch as fir) which grew in southem Palestine, The existence of Egyptian wade with 
Souther Palestine as carly as fhe Badacian and Naqala 1 periods makes it likely that 
coniferous woods were also imported from his region 

"As well as he archaeological evidence, there is sound textual evidence that coniferous 
woods and associated producls, such as oils and resins, were imported into Egypt as early 
sas he reign of Aba. Oll form the mrnw-tree_ often translated as ‘cedar’, but possibly used 
Jat this early period to denote Asiatic conifers in general is mentğonad on an alabaster 
vessel and s label of Aha (Peuse 1901: pl. 102; Kaplony 1963-308, Ward 1991:14) The 
whirl register of his label hus been iotetpreted by one scholar as showîng ‘the repurm of a 
sewgolng expeditio from Lebanon wilh a load of he highly desired, coniferous mera 
wood" (O'Connor 1987-33-4), although the commodity to whieh the label was originally 
altched is more likely to have been the processed mw oil rather than the wood itsell, 
The same oil is also mentioned on a potery vessel fom the Early Dynastic cemetery of 
Abu Umurî (Kaplony 1964: no. 1065). Later in the Fit Dynasty, he products of another 
coniferous eee {in Egyptian, possibly ir or juniper—are meatîoned oa stone vessels 
of Anedjis (Lacau and Laver 1940: pl. 3.6-7: Kaplony 1963-306; Ward 1991:13). The 
term oceurs again on a Second Dyeasty stele from Helwan (Saad 1957:19) A 
contemporary sela om the same site names another cil or resin obtained fromm the 
saree, namely sS This product is likewise anested on a Third Dynasty stela in Brooklyn 
(James 1974-11), while the early Third Dynasty tomb of Hesir at Saqqara mentions boli 

{ands roils (H.Alenmûller 19763, 13; Wand 1991:13) 

“The vival abandonment of Egypt's long-standing links with souther Palestine was 
an important development The peincipal reason for such a fundamental change in the 
pattem of Egyptian foreigntride is Ikely to have been economic, in parlieular 4 


‘spiralling ierdependenee between timber procurement, ship constuction and carrying 
capacity” (Marfoe 1987:27). Larger ships, capable of undenaking sea voyages, would 
have provided easier and faster transportation for larger cargoes, compared to overland 
caravans. Ix has been estimated that a ship bome cargo of irade gods could have reached 
Et in half the time required for animal and human ponerge. However, the 
eamtretion of seaworthy ships wus oaly made possible by access 10 the superior timber 
ofthe Byblos hinterland, Thus, once the Egyptians had gained foothold on the Lebanese 
Iitoral, economic factors quickly led t0 the dominance of this particular trade 
relationship. 


Relartons wlth Libya 


‘Several of the ceremonial palettes from the period of state formation depict slain or 
capûve enemies wearing the penis sheath. 1 iner artistic couvenion, his piece of 
clothing was used, Inter alla, 1o indicate Libyans. His possiole, therefore, that these 
palettes record skinnishes between he Egyptians and thet western neighbours during the 
process to forge a united Egyptian state. A more convincing pice of evidence r 
Egypian contact wilh Libya is the so-calied ‘Libyan Paleue' from the very end of he 
Predynastic period. The palete seems to record the name _ hm, later associated with 
Libya, below a depiction of booty. This suggests a military campaign against Libya by a 
late Predynastic ruler, part of a general phenomenon of aggressive activity on and beyond 
Egypt's borders which characterises the period of state formation. Further support for this 
interpretation is provided by a small ivory cylinder fom Hierakonpolis, dating to the first 
reign of the Fit Dynasty. Ki depicts the catîsh element of Narmer's name smiting three 
registers of bound captives. Under the tail of the catfish a short inseription names (73) 

‘hn: ‘(he land of) Libya’. This record of a campaign by Narmer is the carliestknovrs 
definite representatioa of Libyans. In sccodance with ter practice, they are shown with 
beards. 

Afer hese carly contacts of a more or less hostile nature, Egypt seems to have shou 
Sile interest in is westar neighbour until much later in 1S history. There is no further, 
unequivocal evidence for Egypts relations with Libya during the rest of the Early 
Dynastic period. Workmen's drawings on the enclosure wall of Sekhemkhet's mortuary 
complex include a ende igure tentatively identîfed as a Libyan (Goneim 1957:2, and 5 
fig. T2), bul his identification is doubt. 


خسم وا بت 


As well as direct contacts of a commercial or military nature with its more immediate 
neighbours, early Egypt maintained trading contacts wih more distant land, Evidence of 
loag-distunce trade is o be found ia the wide range of exotic muterials buried in wealthy 
graves of the lute Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods, A good example is Tomb 11 at 
Hierakonpolis Locality 6 (Adams and Friedman 1992334). Dating 1o Naqada Hl, he 
burial contained many examples of prestige materials imported from distant lands. These 
ineluded lapis lazuli beads Hom Afghanistan or Iran; small frngmeats of flanged barrel 
bends made of silver, probably from casters Anatolia; gamet rons the castes desert: 
ımurquolse Irom the mines of Sinai; and obsldlan blades Ro Ethiopia (or Anatolia). Such 


Bary drastic Haye 118 


ıa combination of prestige materials in a single grave clearly indicates the wealth of the 
fomb owner, the economic power of late Predyastic rulers and the well-developed nature 
of long-distance trade networks in the late fourth millennium RC. 


Silver from Anatolia 


According to the few analyses which have been conducted, the small number of silver 
objects fom Early Dynastic contexts seen to be made of naive Egyptian silver-gold 
(Prag 197840) that is, gold with a high percentage (as much as 70 per cent) of silver, 
ofen refermed to as ‘electrum” ( ). By contrast, he silver fom lute Prodyastic 
contexts seems to be more purt, witî a much lower pereentage of gold (Prag 1978-30), 
and was, herefore, probably imported fon Anatolia. The oaly major sources of silver is 
‘he Near East recognised today are in the Amanus Range (Prag 197840). Situated some 
اا ایا ترا اہ اا ا و‎ 
to as the ‘silver mountain’, oa a tablet set up ia he temple Ekur ia Nippur (Pritchond 
16026). 

The largest group of fourt-milennium silver objects (over 200) comes from the 
Endolilhlque cemetery at Byblos Such a concentration of silver at one site suggests that 
Byblos may have played an important fole in the Near Eastem silver trade during the 
fourth millennium (Prag 1078-41). The disappearance of imparted silver fiom Egyptian 
contexts at the beginning of the Early Dynastic period may indicate that the Levantine 
source of supply had been worked out by This date, causing the trade via Byblos 10 cease. 
The new sources further 1o fhe north, which had a higher lead content and thus required & 
more sophisliested Iechnology to extrsct the silver, seem to have supplied weslerm 
‘Anatolia and Mesopotamis in preference lo Syria-Palcstine and Egypt (Prag 1978:41), 1a 
ihe Eacly Dynastic period, 1herefore, Egypt Tell back upon its own reserves of ‘white 
metalî, namely the native sılver-rieh gold ores of the eastern desert. 


Obsidian from Anatolia, Arabia and Fries 


Another material which may have been imparted from Anatolia is obsidian, the hard, 
black, volcanic glass nue peized both for blades and for decorative objects. No obsidian 
occurs within the boners of modem or ancient Egypt. A recent analysis of an obsidian 
ol fom Tell eliswid South in he norlweasterm Delt suggests that he material itsell 
came from the Teurus Mountains in eastenm Anatolia (Nemrut Dag) (Schmidt 1992:34): 
Anatolia has been idenified as the primary souree for the obsidian trade to the Levan, 
Mesopotamia and Iran in ancient times (Zarins 1990-509), However, Anatolian obsidian 
has not been identified in ihe southem Negev or Sinai, regions known 1o have been in 
close contact wilh Egypt during the late Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods (Zarins 
1990.512). Furthermore, of 16 Egyptian siies with reportel obsidian finds, only five are 
in Lower Egypt (Zarin 198:366) Both these factoes make it likely that most of the 
obsidian fron early Egyptian contexts derives from the sourecs closer to ihe Red Sea. 
Trace element analysis suggests sourecs in Arıbia and Erivea, which would have 
supplied Egypt trough coastal exchange amd perhaps ses-bome missions down ELyp's 
Red Seu coast (Zarins 1980368). 


Obsidin is by no means camanon in carly Egyptian contexts. It amay be significant that 
many pieces were apparently found at Coptos, the iow that controllal access lo Red Sea 
ıeade later in Egyps history (Zarins 1989366). Obsidian was also found in several areas 
of the Early Dynastic tenmple ar Hierakonpolis, although not sll the occurrences can be 
securely dated to the Early Dynastic period. An obsidian bead was saemually found 
ndemeath the Narmer Palete in the ‘Main Deposit" (Adams and Friedman 1992-319) 
Most of the obsidian fon Early Dynastic Egypt comes from royal tombs. Three small 
vases were found in Chamber C of the tomb of Nellh-hotep at Naqada (de Morgan 
1897:16, îs 625-7), Tomb BS at Abydos, also dating to he reign of Aha, contained a4 
serrated Shject of obsidian, referred to as 4 ‘comb? (Petre 1901: pl. XKXILIO} Vases 
and yase agments were found in the mortvary complexes of Djer and Ancdjib at 
Abydos (Pete 1901: pl. XLVIID. There seem to be no published examples of obsidian 
ffom clear Second or Third Dynasty contexts, 


Lapis zul from Afghanistan and Iran 


“The ancient lapis lızulî trade appears to have had more than one supply source (Delmas 
wand Casanova 1990-504) includlng mines in the former Soviet Union (Pamir Mountains) 
and Pakistun (the Chagai Hills on the Pakistan-lran bone), as well as the well-known 
mines of Sar-i Sung in the Badakhshan province of Afhanistan. Although there is a veY 
faint possibility that there may have been a source of lapis lazuli in the region of the 
Kkarga or Dakhla Oasis, this is unconfirmed (Nesdier 1984.311), The sourezs in Asia 
semain the most likely origin for the lapis found in Predynastic and Early Dynastic 
The largest object of lapis fromm early Egypt is he statuette from the Hicrakonpolis 
Main Deposit lt has no parallels in Egypt and may well be of foreign manufacture 
(Payne 1968-58; Rice 1990). The Early Dynastic contexts in which lapis has been found 
include early Fist Dynasty graves at Tura and Tarkhan, the tomb of Djer ar Abydos, and 
mastaba V at Nalet Baten, This large tomb is dated by inseriptioa (Petrie 1907: pl 
IMA), by its architecture (Petrie 1907-5) and by its contes (ef Petrie 1901: pl L153) 10 
he reign of Djet In addition to the fine toilet objects of gold and ivory, the tomb 
contained a small but exquisite vase of lapis lazuli {Petrie 1907.4, pls Ill, V3). This 
epteseats The last occurrence of lapis in Early Dynastic Egypt, as the long-distance trade 
‘Sems 1o have been disrupted carly in the First Dynasty (Payne 1966. There is a break in 
he peesence of lapis in Egypûan contexts fon afer the reign of Djet (contra Rice 
1990:90) and throughout the Second and Third Dynasties. This hianus in the supply 
motehes a similar disruption in Mesopotumia, from shortly afer the beginning of EBI 
unlîl EBI (Herrmann 1968:37; Moofey 1987:30), and may have been the result of 
political changes in present-day Irn. Lapis lazuli is not attested again in Egypt until he 
Four Dynasty, sote 500 years later. The earliest reference 1o lapls lazuli (% 4h0) in an 
inscription is in the early Fourth Dynasty tomb of Rahotep (Petrie 1892: pl. XID. 


Te Sinat 


Tireughout Egyptian history, he northemı Sinai coast formed a convenient route fron 
Ezypt o southern Palestine Egypt's contacts with nohem Sinai were thus Inextrieably 


Bary dynastic teyre 140 


bound up with the changing pattern of Egyplian-Palestinian relations, Throughout the era 
of intensive contacts between Egypt and southerm Palestine __the lale Predynastic period 
and First Dynasty northern Sinat must have played an important role. lı served as the 
primary roule for the movement of both people and commodities. However, he Egyptian 
îles along fhe north Sinai coastal route do not appear 1o have supponed a permanent 
populatioa, since The potery was all imported ftom the Nile valley (Poet 1902-435 
alike the siruation at shes in souhem Palestine iself where, as we have see, Eayptians 
made thelr own potery from local materials, The storage vessels incised wit carly royal 
serek found st el-Beda in noqthem Sinai (Clêlat 1914) ilustrate the segion's strategie 
cation on the main trade route between Egypt and the Near East 

BY contrast, the more remote and inaccessible southern part of the Sinai peniasula was 
only of interest 1o the Egyptians fo ts minersl resources. The history of Egyptian 
involement in southern Sima is hus essentially the history of Egyptian mining 
expeditions, beginning only ia the Third Dynasty. Ia the mountains of southern Sinai » 
network of Palestinian setlements has been excavated, dating to the EBI (First and 
‘Sesond Dynasties in Egyp0) (Bei-Acieh 1984). Their material culture shows close links 
with contemporary sites in southern Palestine, especially Tell Arad. Arad was the largest 
fortifed town in southern Palestine at this ine and may well have exercised some dezree 
of control over the southem Sinai settlements, Their peimary purpose, it would appear, 
was to exploit he nearby resources OF copper Tor export. Ht is striking that none of these 
EBI selements shows any signs of Egyptian influence. Egypt therefore seems to have 
shown litle interest in southem Sinai during the First and Second Dymusties, The 
evidence from souher Sinai makes it unlikely that the First Dynasty Egyptian 
involvement in Palestine was of an expansionist nature fox, in such a situation, he 
Egyplîan authorities would scareely have allowed the contact between Arad and the 
coppermining senlements of souhem Sinai to continue uninterrupted (Beit-Arieh 
1984:20. 

To dale, he earliest evidence of Egyptian invoivement in southern Sina comprises the 
Third Dynasty rock-cut inscriptions in the Wadi Maghara, the site of murquoise-mining 
expedition. I appears that the Egyptians did not venture beyond the immediate sourees 
of turquoise, as there is no evidence of an Egyptian presence or influence at other sites in 
southern Sinai during he Early Dynastic period (Beit-Arieh 198422 3). Atogether, 

ree kings have left inscriptions at Wadi Maghara: Nejerikhet (Djoser), Sekhemkther andî 
‘Sanakhr (Gardiner and Peet 1952. pls 1, IV; Giveon 1914). J is clear that the mais 
purpose of the Egyplian expeditions was to mine turquoise, a highly valued semi. 
precious stone used particularly in jewellery. The name given to the Wadi Maghara in 
leer inseriptions is iw f3, ‘the turquoise terraces” (Gardiner and Poet 1955:1). The 
mala stratum of turquolse-bearing roek lay about halEWway up the clifT and the workings 
consisted of galleries vith a small opening on the clif.face (Gardiner and Pert 1955:20) 
Expeditions were clesily a soyal monopoly, organised along the same lines as military 
campaigns. The Egyplian word mf may be translated either as ‘expediion’ or as “army, 
depending on the context; it merely denotes an organised body of men. 

‘The rock-eut inseripion carved under Netjerkhet is the most informative about the 
composition and purpose of the Third Dynasty mining expeditions (Gardiner and Peet 
1955:53), As well as depictions of the king, it includes the figure of a man carrying a 
ıstaff of ollice and a hand axe. The inseription above his head gives his les: im-r{d) mf 


and rl det overseer ofthe expedition’ and ‘administrator of the fore 
is unclear whether the later dile refers to southern Palestine, southem Sinai or the hind 
beyond Egypt's northeastern frontier in general. If, in this instance, he tile refers to 
southern Sinai, as the costext of the inseriptioa suggests, it indicates that the area Was 
considered to be outside the Egyptian realm, st least for administrative purposes, even 
though it was accessible t0 Egyptan mining expeditions. Two columns of text to the left 
of the figure detail the nature of the ‘royal mission’ [ıupt nsw). Although not all he 
inscription is readable, the end seems to refer to ‘this mountain of all minerals’. A smaller 
figure, accompanied by some illegible signs, follows. Behind this, in tur, are four 
vertical groups of hieroglyphs, eseh of which gives he name of a member of the 
expedition. One individual, calla Meriib, bore the title ‘royal sionermason/ cacpente 
giving an indication of the type of eraflmen who accompanied such an expedition 10 he 
muquoise mines, The main inseription of Sekhemkhet, a standard scene showing the king 
smiling a foreign enemy, is also accompanied by a Figure labelled as the ink.r(3) mf 
(Gardiner and Peet 1955:52). In addition, he bears a string of titles (Ht sm. .nemt 
Sinise and =3 suf), indicating that he was a man of considerable rank wilh close 
conneeions 10 the royal court. Whether he was in fact a royal soa (3 anı) is not certai 
since this Hile wras also used in an honorific sense by some non-royal hig ofticials ln the 
Old Kingdom. Two rock-cut inscriptions of Sanakht show the king in traditional scenes, 
smiling 3 captive and accompunied by the standard of Wepwawet (Gardiner and Peel 
1955:54 6). The Fagmentary smiting scene, now in the British Museum, includes the 
searlistxnewn occurrence of the word nj “turquoise” (Spencer 1993.101, ig. 7T) 


PERIPHERAL REGIONS 


Like the Near East and the Sinai, he desert regions bordering the Nile valley also seem 1o 
have been a focus of early acliviy (Figure 5.2). 1n all probability, the geographical 
division between the Sinai and Egypt's desert margins, adopted here for convenience, is 
not one that the Egyptians themselves would have recognised, Indeed, the use of the tiles 
mir3 3er and mr 3st may suggest thal for the Early Dynautie Egyptians there 
was only one designation for al the lands beyond their owrn borders: A ut, foreign hill 
country. Certainly the Egyplians iotefest i ihe Sinai and the desert margins stemmed 
from the same consideration: the rich stone and mineral resources which both regions 
possessed, and which he cour required to supply is workshops. 

One might expect that contact berween desert and valley was always, if only 
sporadically, maintained" (Kemp 1983-118), and there is a surprising amount of evidence 
for Early Dynastic involvement in ihe eastem and westem deserts. Whilst he 
geographical limit for rock cul insertions in the weste desert appears t0 be a distance 
of jus 12 miles from the Nile valley, inscriptions in the castem desert are found ‘up to 65 
miles from the river, wel into the heart of the Red Sea hills (Hotiînan 1980.243). This 
indicates 4 greater intensity of Egyptian activity in the eastem desert, probably 
accompanied by a greater degree of interaction 


Barly drastic Haye 142 


N 


Figure 5.2 Activity in Egypt's desert margins. The 
map shows the principal sites in the 
Egyptian deserts where evidence has been 
found of Early Dynastic activity. 


with the indigenous inhabltunts of the region. Unfortunately, we know very litle about 
he aacient populatons of the desert margins. Scaters of potlery and isolated tenıpocary 
encampments suggest that the deserts supported groups of semi-aoaudie pustoralists, in 


whose lives and livelihoods cattle played an important part, Thei material cultures, as Bar 
as They are anested archaeologieally, are generally ‘simple and show ‘broad overall 
similarities both 1o each other and 1o those of he Nile valley” (Kemp 1983-116). None 
he less, tis likely that each group had ks own history and identity and that, f more were 
knows about their material cultures, a picture of considerable diversity would emerge 
(Kemp ISE3-116-17) 


The austen desert 


Te hills and mountains separting the Nile valley fiom the Red Sea receive significantly 
more rainfall than fhe westem desert, especially further south towards Nubia. This gives 
fise 10 a number of wells, and enables some of the numerous wadis 10 support 
yegetation-_even irregular cultivation in the upper reaches of some of the larger wadis 
Ths, the eastern desert has, from earliest times, supported a population of nomadic and 
ısemi-omadic pastoralists, with hor the Egyptians_wiho visited the area frequently on 
ining and quarrying expeditions __ımust have come into regular contact 

Records of early Egyptian activity in the eastern desert are found in the fom of eoek- 
cut inseripions. These usually give just the same of fhe King in whose reign the 
expedition was mounted. The earliest dated inseription is at Ste 18 in the Wadî Qash, a 
ibutary of the Wadî Hanmamat almost due east of Qus, halfway between the Nile 
valley and the Rel Sea coast. The sereth of Narmer is accompanied by another, 
tantalisingly empty serekl (Winklce 1938:10, pl. X11; Emery 1961:47. fig. 6). A roekeui 
inscription tn the Wadi Abbad, east of Elkab, shows the serek of Diet preceded by the KF 
sign (Clêre 1938). The inseripcion is incised on a rock at he junction of the Wadî Miyah 
and the Wadi Chagab, some 25 kilometres along the Wadi Abbad (Clêre 1938:85, fg. 7) 
and five kilometres beyond Bir Abbad (Porter and Moss 1951-321), The Wadî Abbad 
was one of the principal routes tom the Nile valley to the Red Sea, i later times linking 
Edl and Berenice (Clêre 1938:92). A third inseripûon is sinuated at the mouth of the 
Wadi Abu Kun (Site 5) within the Wadi Hammamat system, due east of Qift (Winkler 
1938: pl. XLS; Porter and Moss 1951.324) The mesning of the text is diffieult 10 
interpret, but the insetiption may include the name of the Second Dynasty king, Nebe. A 
more exlensive inseription in a small wadî north of the Wadi Fawakhir provides a small 
piece of information about the composition of Egyptian expeditions to the astem desert 
Dated by its oqhography to the Early Dynastic period, the inscription depicts a divine 
bark_of Honus or Sokar and the accompanying lext mentions an overseer of craftsmen 
Hence, the expedition which eur this particular inseription was probably enguged in 
quarrying activity, supervised by a craftsman with expecience in sione-euing (Porter and 
Moss 1951.320), 


The Wadi Hammamat 


The Wadî Hammamat system of the eastem desert was important for two reasons. Fist 
throughout most of Egyptlan history it wras the main source of siltstone (Lucas 1962.419 
20, sho calls he sock “greywacke'; Aston 1994:2832). This was the stone used or 
cosmetic palettes in the Predynastic period, including the great commemortive palettes 
created or early Egyptian rulers in celebration of thelr kingship. Smalrseale expeditions 


Bary drastic Haymt 144 


to procure supplies of the stone must have been mounted rom Upper Egypt as early as 
he Badarian period, since palates are a characteristic component of ihe Badarian 
funerary fepefoise (Brunon and Caton- Thompson 1928: pl, XXI; Spencer 1903.25), As 
econoenie and poliical power became inereasingly conctnumsd in he hands of a lew 
lineages towards the end of the Predynastic period, missions to the Wadî Hammamat 
probably came under closer royal contol, eventually becoming state-sponsored 
expeditions in he Early Dynastic period. 

‘Second, the Wadî Haramamat was important as the most direct route between the Nile 
valley and the Red Sea, Fron late Predyastic times, this route ean fromm Qif or Qus to 
Quseir (Winkler 1938; Baines and Malek 1980-111 There is still somme argument about 
he likelihood of maritime contes vis the Red Se between Egypt and other culures, 
particulary ihe carly Mesopotamian of Sumer and Sus (Rice 130). Nevertheless, he 
Red Sea coast itself was a valuable source of prestige objects for the developing elites of 
Predynastie Upper Egypt In particular, Red Ses shells seems to have been ibued wilh a 
special symbolic andor religious imponanee, as well as being a value trade commodity 
(or example, Bruton and Cuton-Thompson 192841). Hence, representatioas of he 
Pieroceras (Lambie) shell were carved oa the sides of the Copios colossi, the gigantic 
'seulpuures Of a fertility god dated 10 the late Predlynastie period (Williams I8: Payne 
1903:13, pl. IV), Red Ses shells, probably exported fiom Egypt, have been found in ite 
contexts elaewlaese in the Near East (Moorey, personal communication; cf Rizkana and 
Sethe 1989.117, 125). Wits the dual aration of minerl resources and acces to he 
Rol Sea, it is not surpeising that Egypt's early kings tak a keen terest in the Wadi 
Harmamat, and the royal names carved on socks are direct evidence for his. 


Mines and quarmies 


sroxE 


The eastern desert is particularly sich in stone and mineral resources. As we have seen, 
he focus for stone-qunrying expeditions wras undoubtedly the Wadi Hammamat and i> 
associated wadis. None the less, other regions yielded valuable types of stone for various 
purposes, The travertine quarries at Hatmub in Middle Egypt seer to have been worked 
the Early Dyaastic period. Some of the incised stone vessels ffom the Step Pyramid 
complex bose he name of the site, Hiut-nbhu: probably indicating the provenance of the 
mera Roma which hey were carved Also in Mille Egypt, int deposits were wocked 
to provide the Egyptians with wreapoas and tools. Large-seale int workings dating to the 
Early Dynastic period have been locıted st Nazlet Avrlad esh-Shekh, on the east hank of 
he Nile, some 75 Kilometres south of the Fayumm (Kaiser 1961b; Raines and Mûlek 
198031). 


coprER 


“The area of Pre-Cambrian formations to the west of Gebel Zeit on the Rad Sea coast was 
exploited for its copper reserves Roan early times (Abdel Tawab et al. 1990), The vicinity 
OF el-UOMongul (south) has produced evidence of mining activity froen the beginning of 
he Early Dynastic period to the early Old Kingdom, including miners’ camps and other 


'seatered dwellings. Some vessels could be as easly as the end of the Predynastic period 
or the very beginning of the First Dynasty (Köhler, personal conmmunication, but most OF 
he potery suggests a Fit or Second Dynasty date, although a Third Dynasty date is 
possible. His signilicant hat some of the pottery fiom both elLUrPMongul (south) and 
he Wadi Dara (see below) is of marl clay, and must therefore have been brought fromm 
Upper Egypt by the mining expeditions (Abdel Tawa c1 al. 1990.364). 

The copper mines of the Wadi Dara were also worked most imensively during the 
Early Dynastic and Old Kingdon periods. A French survey of Dara West has revealed 
several Early Dyaastic sites (Abdel Tawab er al. 1990363), of which wo have been 
exeavate in detail, a hıbluion site and a miners’ camp (Castel et al. 1902; Gieimal 
1903.4828, 1996570-2). A thin layer of occupation debris was found on the oor of he 
habitation she (site SE), suggesting hat the bullding had been inhabited for only a brief 
period. The pottery dates the occupation to the Third Dynasty. This is also the ease at he 
eurby miners” camp (ste 5A) where finds attest various activities, including cooking, 
storage of provîsions and tools, tool repair and enrichment and storage of he copper Or 
(malachite), Numerous fragments of malachite were found throughout the camp, but he 
absence of any slag indicates that smeking took place elsewhere, perhaps on the 
neighbouring Nllside. Another miners" camp in the Wadi Dara (site 48), consisting of 
some thirty dry-stone rons, is more dificult io date but he later strata seen to belong 1o 
he Fourth Dynasty. However, earlier activity at the site is indicated by the fact that he 
rooms are built oa earlier mining galleries. Heanhs and coacentratioas of slag on the 
adjacent terrace indicate the location where the ore was smelted The evidence fron the 
copper mines indicates that the greutest intensity of Egyptian activity occurred during the 
Third Dynasty. This complements ihe evidence fro he Wadi Maghara, Sinai, which 
ıanests 1o Turquoisemining expeditions sponsored by at least three Kings of the Third 
Dynasty. Clearly, the Third Dynasty was a time OF great Egyptlan interest in the desert 
regions peripheral to the Nile valley and, more importantly. in the mineral resources of 
ese inhospitable areas. The salvaces in ocganisution and centralised adminiseation 
which must have accompanied the beginning of largescale pyramid-building seem 1o 
have benefited other activities ss well. Perhaps, for the first time, loagdistance 
expeditions could be mounted by the royal court to exploit he resources of Egypt's desert 
Borders ina systematic WaY. 


con 


The comparative rarity of gold in Early Dynastic graves has led some t0 suggest that 
here was litle, f any, systematic exploitation of the eastern desert gold seserves st this 
period {Klemen and Klemm 1994:19), although grave-robbing could be an altemoive 
planation. Rather than regular gold mining expeditions sent from the Nile valley, 
sporadic finds of gold by the nomadic populations of the eastem desert could have bee 
faded with Egyptians oa an ad hoc basis, A survey of the goll-bearing regions of he 
eastern desert hus revealed only limita evidence foc gold mining in the Predyrastic and 
Early Dynastic periods (Klean and Klemm 194:195, fig. 2). The seattered nature of the 
sis and the total hek of artefacts suggests that the mines may have been used by the 
local nomadic populations rather than by Egyptians. 


Bary drastic Haymt 146 


omER 


Whilst the Egyptians may not have engaged in gold-mining activity in the Early Dynastic 
period, There ks no doubt taut they mounted expeditions to the eastern desert in search of 
Other commodities. A single, isolated Early Dynastic hut sras discovered in he Wadî 
Unım Sidrah, near the Roman imperial porphyry mines at Ciebel et-Dukhan 
(GW. Murray 1939). Many artefacts were reeovered Hom the hut, including pouery, int 
tools, ashes and bone fagments, Five eartheaware pot stands __apparently made fiom a 
Ioeally produezd febrie__ showed signs of careful repair in antiquly, an indication of he 
value atached to ponery at s site some 160 kilometres {roan the Nile valley. A stall, bag- 
shaped vessel has been dated 1 the First or Second Dyuasty (GW Murray 193034), 
providing a date for the hur and contents as a whole. The purpose behind sueh a dwelling 
e not clear, but is further evidence of the interest shown n Egype's desert margins in he 
Early Dynastic period. 


The weston desert 


Early Dynastic Egyptian contact with the westem desert seems to have be on two 
levels, There is evidence for limited mixing of semi-nomadice desert-dwellers and 
Egyptians, at desert-edge sites in Upper Egypt. Rock-cut inserîptioas also attest sporadic 
expeditions o he weste desert, mounted by late Predynastic and Early Dynastic Kings. 

A deseıtedge site to fhe west of Amant, investigated only summarily, yielded 
evidence of contaet between the inhabitants of the Nile valley and groups of cutie. 
herding semi-nomads (Kemp 1983:1189 The relationship was possibly a symbiotic one, 
based upon the exchange of cule. The site included 8 cemetery of 76 graves, whieh 
seems 1o Indiete that {he associated setlement was more than a mere tenpocary 
Encampment. The pottery from the graves comprised both Egyptian vessels, dated to the 
Early Dynastic period, and nom-Egyptian ripple-bumished ware. Some of the non 
Egyptian vessels were decoraled with tneised patterns of chevron below the rim. Twenty 
burials were of oxen, showing the great importance attached to cattle by these people, 
There were several staal caps in the vicinity, indicated by ‘scaters of int tools and 
sherds wi various incised or ieıpressed pattems’ (Kemp 183:118) 

Moce direct Egyptian involvement in the western desert is illustrated by a number of 
rocket inscriptions on the escarpment of the high dese in the vicinity of Amant. Two 
separate inscriptions at site 34, oa the edge of the limestone plotenu, bear an early royal 
name which has aot yet been sead convîneingly (Winkler 1938: pl. X1.2-3; Wilkinson 
1995). The epigraphy of the inscription clearly indicates that the King in question must 
belong to the Very end of the Predyynastic period or "Dynasty O’. A third inseriptioa, only 
12 Kilametres away, features the serek of the Second Dynasty king, Nebra (Winkler 
1938:10, pl. XL4; Emery 1961:93, fig. 56, indicating that expediions to the western 
desert were maintained during the Early Dynastic period. A ongoing survey of the desert 
roads in the Theban area has discovered a wealth of late Predymastic and Early Dyoastie 
inscriptions they include he name ofa Thin Dyasty official, and a large roek cut seene 
fiom the period of state formation (Damell and Darnell 1997:26). The latter seems to 
record a military victory, perhaps one of the key events leading to the political unification 
orEaypt 


In contrast to the eastern desert, the weste dese seems to have had fewt, if any, 
resources deemed worthy of exploitation by the ancient Egyptians. Its strategie 
importance lay in the cases. These fertile pockets of land, which hud been sela fromm 
Palaeolithic times (Baines nd Malek 1980.187: Hofman 1980) and which were very 
much part of the Egyplina realan despite their isolation from the Nile valley, guarded 
Egypt's Roatier with the Libyan peoples 1o the west (Baines and Mûlek 1980:19). 
References to the_ hn roan the Early Dytastic period (Hölseher 1955-12-13), together 
wilh he evidence of the so-called ‘Libyan Palete', imply hostle relations berween Eaypt 
and her western neiglibour throughout the late Predynastic 1o Early Dynastic transition. Ia 
‘such a political climate, the maimenance of Egyptian contol of he cases would cleaely 
have been strategically important to Egypt's rulers. Access to the oases was by caravan, 
1eaving he Nile valley ar an appropriate polat on the west bank. 1n the New Kingdom, 

nd probebly in earlier times to, le most ieyportant route through fhe extern desert 1o 
ihe Kkarga and Dakhla Oases erî the Nile valley st Arman (Baines and Milek 180:43) 
I is possible, therefore, that the early mulers who left their names on the limestone 
escarpment behind Arrant mounted expeditions of one sort or another to the western 


The oases 


Whilst here is very litle material to indicate Early Dynastic Egyptian activity in he 
oases, evidence Hom the Old Kingdom may suggest at least limited Egyptian 
involvement in earlier periods. 


Khurga 


The southemmost of the westem desert oases is the Kharga pass, which probably lay on 
the rowe (called ‘ihe oasis road) from Egypt 1o Upper Nubis taken by Harkhuf in he 

buh Dynasty. Evidence for Egyptian contact with the Kharga oasis carly in the Fourth 
Dynasty is provided by a complete ‘Maidun” bowl, of sed-polished ware with a reflexed 
rim, which was found uptumed beside the traek at the top of he Matana pass, in he 
Souihrenst of the Kharga depression (Caton-Thompson 1952:41, pl. 1234). The Matana 
track joins the Bulaq crack in the westem desert between he oasis and the Nile valley, 
and reaches the latter in the vicinity of Amant This fies in with he evidence from the 
western desert near Amant for Early Dynastic activity in the aren. The isolated bow ‘is 
unlikely 1o be the uaique relic of ts kind and period" (Caton- Thompson 105249) in the 
Khanga cass and its associated passes, Further surveys may therefore be expected to 
reveal more evidence Tor early Egyptian contact wilh the Kharga oasis, 


Dakhla 


‘Sîtated to the norih-nest of Kharga, he Dakhla oasis was under Egyptian administration 
from the carly Sixth Dynasty at ihe latest. The town of Balat at the heart of the Dakhla 
oasis seems 10 have served as the adminiseatiye centre for all the oases. A Canadian 
expedition found limited evidence for the presence of Egyptians in the Early Dyaustie 
period (Mills 1980-254). A small cemetery Of some 60 graves in the ir west of the oasis 


Early drastic Heyret 4t 


(32390-12) contained a semi-contrcted burial of an elderly male (32390-12-1) with 
three intact potiery vessels (a jar and two bows) (Hope 1980.288-9, pl. XVILD, c; Mills 
1980258). On the basis of parallels ftom Egypt proper, these have been dated to the 
Early Dynastic period, alhough the Idenifieuton hus bera described as ‘rher tenuous 
(Giddy 1987-166) Even less certain is the attribution of a number of vessels and sherds 
fiom a nearby cemetery to the Third Dynasty, Late Old Kingdon parallels ace known for 
sall the omnes (Giddy 1987:166-7) and a Sixlh Dynasty date is perhaps more likely given 
‘fhe abundant evidence for Egyplian activity in the Dakhla oasis a this period. 


NUBIA 


Eaypt's relations with its southem neighbour were alvays of a different nature from 
contacts with the Near East or the desert margins. For the most part, and certainly 
throughout 1he Early Dynastic period no attempt wus made 10 sele hose regions on « 
permanent basis of to incorporste them into the Egyptian realm Their natural 
esources whether foodsufs, prestige commodities or inerals_were what interested 
ihe Egypians, first and foremost, Though a few ‘colony’ shes seem to have been 
established in souhem Palestine, they appear t0 have coexisted peacefully wilh he 
indigenous inhabitants. A reciprocal trade relationship between Egyptians and *Asiaties 

would hve benefited boll sides, and best fits he available evidence for Egy ptian-Near 
Easter relations in he Early Dynastic period. The desert margins and peripheral regions 
were visited only sporadically, by expeditions in seach of purieular materials, unually 
stones, In contrast 1o both these areas of Egyptian activity, the land to the south he 
Nubian Nile valley was fac more easily accessîele, and presented no great geographical 
difference ftom the Egyptians” ow territory. But for the First Cataract south of 
Elephantine, the Nubian Nile valley was esseatlally a continuation of the Egyplian Nile 
valley, and the Egyplians seem to have seen it as a natural addition to ther realm 

Tisoughout much of Egypan history. the relationship betwee Egypt and Nubia was 
one of subjugator and subjugated, master and servant. Egypt sought t0 impose bolh ils 
will and ius culture on Nubla, whilst exploiting he couny's sesourees (mineral and 
human) and controlling access 10 the lucrative sub-Saharan trade routes; exotic goods 
fom sub-Saharan Afica reached the Mediterranean world via ihe Nubian corridor 
(W.Y.Adams 1977: Seidlmayer 19960-111. The importance of Nubia to Egypt in the 
dynastic period stema fron Nubia's lrge reserves of gold, I< seems likely that Egypt's 
own sources of gold became exhausted 1owanls the end of the Predynastie period, 
necessitating the exploftaion of new gold-bearlag aress. Other imports fiom Nubia 
ineladed ebony. 

Unlike he Near East and the peripheral regions, Nubia was setled more or less 
permanently by Egyptians, beginning in the Early Dynastic period. Egyptian coatacls 
Wh she land 1o the soul stretch far back ioto the Predynastic period. Although he 
relationship swifly became an unequal one, there is some evidence thu Lower Nubia 
was not fir behind Egypt ia he process oF state formution and the race t0 establish 
political and economic hegemony over the Nile valley. Had Lower Nubian, rather than 
Upper Egyptian rulers won hat ce, the history of northeast Afica would have been 
very different 


Relations with Lower Nubla 


1n the carly Predynastic period, here was a degree of cultural uniformity throughout 
Upper FEaypt and Lower Nubia, The pottery of Naqala I and the earliest phase of the 
Lower Nublan A-Giroup are victually indisinguishable. Moreover, A-Group sites are 
found in southermmast Upper Egypt (for example, Kubania) indiesting some overlap 
between the two cultural areas. For the late Predynastie and Early Dynastic periods, the 
cultural inventory om shes in the Aswan region, especially Elephontine, indicates a 
contact ane bewecn Egyptian and Nubian cultural areas, rather han a clear boundary 
(Seidlmayer 1996:11 1). Cuhural transfer between Nubia und Egypt is suggested by the 
came burials in the dite cemetery at Hierakonpolis, Locality 6 (flofinan 1982556) 
"This practice does not seem 1o have been indigenous 1o Predynastic Egyp, but is attested 
wat Qustul in Lower Nubia (Williams 1986:176). Direct contact between the peoples of 
Upper Egypt and Lower Nubia in he late Predynastic period may be indicated by a burial 
ftom Abusir el-Meleq in northerm Upper Egypt Grave SIb2 was found 1o be unusual in 
several respeels, lt was the only circular grave in the eatire cemetery, 1 shape more 
Characteristic of burials in southern Upper Egypt and Nubia. The grave goods tneludel 
mmo blaek-mouthed jars of Nubian ype (Mêllers and ScharfT 1926: pl. 1696-7) and a 
palete of unusual shape (Möllers and Scharf! 1926: pl. 33.330), more commonly found 
i Nubian burials, The excavator concluded that the individual buried in grave SIb2 may 
have been a Nubian immigrant (MÖllers and Scharf 1926.29; ef Nesdier 1084.224). 

Graves of ihe Lower Nubian Terminal AGûroup often contain large numbers of 
imported Egypûan anefacts_puricularly potery and stone vessels indicating an 
inensifcation of trade between Upper Egypt and the emergeat complex societies of 
Lower Nubis towards the end of the Predynustic period (Takamiya 1994) Both regions 
were actively involved in he process of state foxmmalioa, and there is clear evidence of a 
cenuralised polity in Lower Nubia whose rulers were buried at Qustul No oer cemetery 
of the Terminal A-Ciroup approaches Qustal Cemetery L in the size or wealth of its 
burials (O'Connor 1993-20). Lower Nubia under the Terminal AGiroup amay therefore be 
envisaged a a pıoto-kingdom, comparable to the lute Predynastic polities of Upper Ezypt 
(O'Connor 1993.22). The maces and mace handle from Cemetery 137 near Seyala 
indicate that the concentration of political power in Lower Nubia had already begun some 
ime earlier (O'Coanor 1993-23). 


Eayptian domination 


FEayptlan expeditions may have ventured into Lower Nubia in late Pradynastie times to 
exploit he dioeite quarries 80 kilometres north-west of Toshka. Egypt's atitude towards 
Nubia certainly became more predatory st the end of the Predynustic period. Sub-Saharan 
Afiea was the source of exotic and prestige goods such as ebony, ostrich eggs, giraffe 
ails, perhaps incense and unguenls. The desire on he part of Upper Egypuian rulers 1o 
control trade routes directly, ruther than continuing to rely on Lower Nablan middlemen, 
probably encouraged the Egyptian rulers to mount raids against Lower Nubia. The period 
Of site formation in Egypt was also characterised by territorial expansionism, 
establishing Egyptian contupl beyond the borders of the Nile valley. The combination of 
hese wo faces prompted Upper Egyptian rulers to launch military expeditions against 
Lower Nubia 1owands ihe end of the Predymastie period, expeditions which were 


Bary drastic tame 10 


ultimately 10 result in Egypûan domination of the region and the extirpation of he 
indigenous A-Group culture. 


THE MONUMENTS OF GEBEL SHEIKH SULEIMAN 


Just such û campaign is reeoaled in the famous Gebel Shekh Suleiman rocket 
inscription (Figure 53). The scene was carved on a rock in the Second Catarset region 10 
commemarate an anonyrnous King of the lale Prelynastic period Dynasty U". An empty 
serekl stands st fhe head of the seene which depicts he afermath of a batle. 
mmediately in front of the serel is a prisoner, his arms bound behind his back rit û 
bow, the sign used in later periods to write the name for Nubia (Ta-Sety). In fiont of he 
prisoner are three signs, the meaning OF which remains uncertain. A pool of water, the 
hieroglyphic sign for the leter , may indicate the name of the peisoner or his territory. 
Tuo town sins surmounted by birds may also be symbols or names of defented 
selemenls The end of the scene shows the prostrate bodies of vicims, undemeath a 
high-prowed vessel. This last element peobably stands for the ships which bore the 
Eqypilan expedition southwards into Lower Nubia. The whole inscription apparently 
secords an Egyptian military raid isto Lower Nubia before the advent of the First 
Dynasty, seting the scene for similar campaigns in the Early Dynastic period (in the 
seins of Aha and Khasekhem). 


A second roek-cut inscription at Gebel Sheikh Suleiman, just a short distance away, is 
also early in date (Nendier 1967) The inseription consists of a large scorpion and thiee 
human figures (Figure S.3). Onc of the figures is a captive, distinguished by an erect 
feather on his hed: his ars are bound behind his bek, aad he is suspended fro rope, 
held in the claws of the scorpion, The second figure looks on, beandishing an unidentified 
weapon; an appendage dangling fom the bek of his Kilt has bee terpreled a an 

jinal's tail {afîer parallels on the Hunters’ Palette). The third man shoots with a bow 
and arto iowards the bound captive; he to appears 1o wear an animal's tail. There may 
originally have been futher signs between ihis thin figure and the scorpion, but only 
aces remain whic are difficult to delineate. The interpretation of he scene as a whole 
seems qukte clear: the scorpion represents a divine or royal power (other animals are used 
in his way oa late Predynastie objects, such as the catfsh which smites s bound captive 
on an ivory cylinder of Narmer rom Hierkonpalis). The two amed men must be 
followers of thls power, whilst the captive ts clearly an enemy. The motif of a prisoner 
being held by a ope is found in other late Predynastic inseriptions, such a the Bull 
Palette ia the Louvre. Ht seems quite ikely that this second inseription st Gebel Sheikh 
‘Suleiman reeonls an expedition 10 the Second Cataract region by a late Predyastie 
Egyptian ruler, synnbolised by the scorpion. The captive identilied by a feather on his 
hed may represent a native inhabitant of Lower Nubia. It is possible that the scorpion 
alludes even more directly to the king (os the catfish does oa the ivory cylinder of 

tarmer) In this case, the inscription would record an expediuioa of King “Seorpion” into 
Nubia during the final stages of Egyptian state formation. Support for this hypothesis 
may be provided by 1 stone vessel from Hierakonpolis which is decoeated in raised relief 
"Wilh several signs, among thers a seorpion and a Jouble-convex bow. One can speculate 


hat his vase may have been commissioned to commemorate a campaign by Scorpion 
against Nubia, represented by the bow (Neolier 196791), 


inst Nubia. Iconographic 


Figure 5-3 Campa 
evidence pian aggression (real or 
ideological) against its southem 
neighbour: (1) late Predynastic rock-cut 
inscription from Gebel Sheikh Suleiman 
near the Second Cataract, recording a 


arly drastic Haye 152 


punitive incursion by Egyptians, perhaps 
inder the command of a ruler frum 
Hierakonpolis (alter Needier 1967: pl. 1, 
fig. 3): (2) a second rock-cut inseription 
from Gebel Sheikh Suleiman, recording a 
subsequent campaign by an Egyptian king 
ofthe lale Predynastic period (after 
Murmane 1987.285, fig. 1A-B); G) 
wooden label of Aha from Abydos 
refering to a campaign agains! Ta-Sety, 
the name applicd in later periods to Nubia 
(after Emery 1961:51, fig. 11); (4) 
fragmentary limestone stcla of Khasekhem 
from the temple at Hierakonpolis, 
recording the king's suppression of Nubia; 
the bow on the head of the prostrate 
captive identifies him as the representative 
of subjugated Nubia (the bow was the 
hieroglyph for (Ta-)Sety, Nubia’) (after 
Emery 1961:100, fig. 64). Not to same 
seale. 


EARLY DYNASTIC MILITARY CAMPAIGNS IN LOWER NUBIA 
At the beginning of the Fit Dynasty the royal cemetery at Qustul was abandoned, 
indicating thur the local rulers hd lost power to he anvading Egyplians. The virtual 
extinction of the Lower Nubian Group is traditionally linked to the beginning of 
FEgypilan domination in Nubia. The rulers ofa newly unified Egypt seem 1o have adopted 
an uncompromising atinude towards their souhem neighbours, replacing he previous 
‘Symbiotic celationship that had existed becween Egypt and Lower Nubia, a reldonsbip 
whieh greatly benefited the rulers of Qustul in their role as middlemen. Exyption control 
may have been less than total at first, requiring follow-up action 1o keep the local 
popalatioa in check (Figure 53), The construction of the fortress on Elephantine at he 
ginning of the First Dynasty seems to have been punt of a new, more aggressive 
Egyptian policy towards Nubia (Seidlmayer 1996b-112). As part of is progrummme Io 
secure and emphasise national unity to a large extent rough ideology ihe ceatral 
goverment sought to impose political frontiers based upon terıitocial control ‘in place of 
former, less clearly delimited ethnic border zones (Sdlmayer 1996:11). The 
Elephantîne fortress may have been used as a springboard for raids into Nubia, such as 
he punitive campaign reeveded on a lale of Aka (Peuse 1901: pls 1IL.2-XII. Further 
military action is atested at he end of he Second Dynasty, in he reign of he 
Khasekhenn (Quîbell and Green 1902: pl. LVI) The increased Egyptian interest in 


Nubia during the Early Dynastic period may have been connected wilh changing trade 
pattems in the Near East. The apparent abandonment of the Egyptien presence in 
southem Palestine (the ‘residency” building at Ea Besor) at the end of he First Dynasty 
ay have resulted fiom an Egyptian realisation that exotic good could be obtained mote 
easily from Nubia. 


A permanent Egyptian presence in Lower Nubia 


The next phase of Egyplian policy towards Nubia is marked by the establishment of a 
permanent garrison at Buhen. I must have become apparent t0 the Egypûans that 
political contol was difficult 10 maintain without a permanent peesence in the coaquered 
efrtory. I is difficult to establish precisely when the Egyptian setlenment st Buhen was 
founded Ceriainly it was in use by the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty. Sncfenu used the 
fortress as a base to launch strikes against Upper Nubia. However, the large size of the 
mudbrieks employed in the lowest courses of the town at Buhen led its excavator to 
believe that he town was founded in the Second Dynasty (Emery 196LI), i is 
Merefore possible that Buhen may have been estiblishel as part of Khasekhen's 
concerted campaign to sestore and setnforce Egyplian control over Lower Nubia. 

An important, piece of evidence may support this imerpeetaion. A roek-cut 
hieroglyphic ieseription o the south face of ‘Hil B, behind the Od Kingdom ıown of 
"Buhen, has been dated to the Early Dynastic period (F1 S.Smith 1972), The translation of 
he insertion presents a number of diiticulies, Nevertheless, the large scale of he 
inscription and ils prominent position close to the settlement st Buben (less than 300 
meres fiom the own enclosure wall) indieste that he inseription is dedicatory in 
ıChuracer It may be no coincidence that he text apparently refers 1o the two deities later 
associated wil Buhen, namely Horus and lain. Perhaps it was carved 10 commmemorite 
he foundation of the Egyptian settlement at Buhen. le provides further evidence for early 
Egyptian activity in the Second Cauract region: Hil B is only nine Kilometres from 
Gebel Sheikh Suleiman with ks early insertions. 


Relarions wil Upper Niha 


“The status of Upper Nubia in early times and Egypt's relationship with the area south of 
he Second Cataract are less wellknown. Archaeological investigution has been less 
intensive than in Lower Nubia, and it is to be hoped thar future excavations will reveal 
muuch moce about ihe carly history of the region. Judging by the occasional referenecs in 
Egyptian texts, Upper Nubia seems to have supported a substantial population during the 
Old Kingdom, and probably during the preceding Early Dynaste period as well 
(O 'Cannar 1993-27. If he extinction of the indigenous A-Group indicates that Egypt 
exercised effective control of Lower Nubia Ro the beginning of the Early Dyoasie 
period, hen the mids into Nubia mounted by Early Dynastic Kings may have been 
rected against Upper Nubia in onder t0 maintain Egyptian access 1o lucrative trade 
roues (O'Connor 1993:25). 1t would certainly have been in Egypl’s interests to safeguard 
iis relations with Upper Nubia, since his segion was the principal source of many 
prestige commodities (O'Connor 1993:27). 


Early drastic Haymt 154 


Tuo isolated pieces of evidence suggest a measure of direct coataet between Egypt 
and Upper Nubî Iovwands the end of the Early Dynastic period. The fit is an inseribed 
stone slab from Helwan, dedicated 1o a man called Sisi (Sad 195746, fig. 32, pl. 27; 
Fischer 1963:35, fg. 1). Stylisicaly, he piece may be dated to the lale Secoad Dynasty 
or early Third Dynasty, Sis is shown wearing a series of armlets, a feuture which is 
unknown amongst comtemporary representations of the Egyplian male, but which seems 
to have been a characteristic of Nubiwns: compare, for example, » scene from he 
causeway of Sahura's mortuary temple (Fischer 196335, fig. 2) Moteover, Sis's hair is 
arrange ina distinctive style, wilh 8 series of four twisted locks hanging below shoulder 
level: a comparable style is found in later representations of Nubians and inhabitants of 
Pun, for example in the Hatshepsut reliefs at Deir el-Bahci (Fischer 1963:36, fg. 3). 
Taken together, these to characteristics suongly suggest that Sisî was a Nublan, mosî 
probably from Upper Nubia. 

The second piece of evidence argues more convincingly for direct trade relations 
between Egypt and Upper Nubia. It consists of a peripheral burial in Cemetery 7 at 
Shellal, just souh of Elephantine, on the Egyptun-Niubian border (Fischer 1963; 
O'Comor 1993:27), Although he majocity of the graves in this censetery belonged o the 
A-Group, dating at the very latest to the early First Dynasty, one burial, isolated om the 
mala group, was dated to a later period, probably he Second or Third Dynasty (Fischer 
963.31). The burial was unquestionably thur of a Nubian (O'Connor 1993:27), and he 
deceased was clearly a man of some status: he was imerred holding wo valuable copper 
objects, and wearing an elaborate gold necklace. Each ann was adomed with a v-shaped 
ıarmmlet of ivory, and in sdditioa he wore a series of smaller bracelets on one wrist. The 
distinctive vahaped alet is of a type never encountered in Lower Nubia, but a very 
ısimilar object is wom by the (Upper) Nubian representa on the Sahuea causeway relief 
mentioned above (O'Connor 1993:27). 1t hus been suggested thar the individual buried at 
‘Shellal was an Upper Nubian trade envoy who died unexpectedly whilst visiting Egypt 
(O'Connor 1993.2 


CHAPTER SIX 
KINGSHIP 


‘From before "history" began, Egyptian society centered on kingship” (Baines 1995:147). 
As his quotation makes clear, the central position of kingship iw ancient Egyptian culture 
has long been recognised and acknowledged by Egyplologists (for example, Hotliman 
1980257). Whilst the enduring achievements of the early Old Kingdom (te Giza 
pyramids and spin) symbolise for many ihe apogee of royal power, i has become 
increasingly clear that the roots of Egyptian Kingship go back much further, ioto the 
Predynastie period. The evidence for growing social strtifieation and political 
centralisation during the Predynastic period has been discussed in Chapter 2. The origins 
of soyal ieonography, alseady evident in he Painted Tomb at Hierakonpolis (dating 1o 
Naqala I) have now been pushed even further back with the discovery of a painted 
vessel ia 4 lute Naqada 1 tomb st Abydos. Inasmuch as iconography is the artistic 
expression of ideology, we ean assume that the Upper Egyptian rulers of late Naqada I 
Were already beginning to formulate an ideology of rule. This was developed and 
elaborated by the Predynastie Kings of This, Naqada and Hierakonpolis, and their 
successors of the period of siste formation. The earliest royal monuments, which dte 
fiom this time, indicate that the late Predyasic Kings were already ‘charged with the 
power of divinity” (Frmaklort 148-34). 

By the time Egypt was unified in ¢. 3100 BC, divine kingship had emerged as 4 
ıcaherent and powerful ideology. Indeed, ‘the unification increased he significance of 
kingship’ (Frankfort 1948:34), promoting the institution from a regional to a national 
position. The King no longer Exercised merely regional authority, shared with a number 
Of other nilers, He was now at the pinnacle of a nntional government, responsible for he 
wesire land of Egypt and its peuple. As the sole source of uthorisy, ihe king symbolised 
Egy itself, and was respoasible for rmaintainîng and defending the Egyptian way of life. 
He scted as iotermediury between the population and their gods, and was himself the 
ernbodiment of the supreme ezlestial deity, Horus. The ideology of kingship emphasised 
he power of the king to isterede on his people's behalf, including his ability <10 
dominate and further natural processes, especially the inundation’ (Frankfort 148-58) 
“At its most fundamental, ‘kingship in Egypt remained the channel through which the 
powers of mature owed into the body politic to bring human endeavor to fruition’ 
(Frankiort 1948-4) 

lı fell to the rulers of the Early Dynastic period to exploit this ideology foe their our 
ends: 1o secure and maintain politcal and economic contol of the counuy and ils 
sesourees, lo promote kingship as the fulfilment of a divinely ordained model for society 
(f. Frankfort 1948-101, and hence to ensure the survival of kingship as he only 
acceptable form of government. The ideology of divine Kingship was reinforced and 
promoted by many means, including the king's regalia and itulary, depictions of the ruler 
and his actioas (iconography), and the rivals and ceremonies of he cour. By explocing 
hese different aspects of carly Kingship, we can begin to shed somme light on the early 
development of an institution central to Egyptian civilisation, the nature of the institution 


Bary drastic Haymt 156 


itself, he ideology which surrounded it, and he methods by whieh the Early Dynastic 
Kags successfully uiliset this ideology to reinforce heir grip on power 


THE FRAMEWORK OF KINGSHIP IN EARLY EGYPT 


The ing as Horus 


The most fundamental aspect of kingship was the ruler's embodiment of Honus, the 
supreme celestial deity. The king's principal tile was the Horus ite, “ihe simples and 
most direct statement regarding the king's nature’ (Frankfort 1948:46). It expressed the 
notion thar Horus was incamale in the reigning monarch, and the Horus name articulated 
he particular aspect of Horus that the king wished 1o sues. Although each new reign 
might highlight a different cet of ihe supreme deity, the divine essence of the god which 
inhabited the body of he reigning King remained unchanged. 

The identification of the ruler with Horus, represented by a falcon, is apparent from 
ute Predynastie times, and is given expression on royal monuments and in the sereks of 
Kags from the period of ste formation. It is possible that the worship of a celestial 
fleva god ras widespread in Predynastic Egypt since there is evidence for the existence 
ıo several falcon cults. As a universal deity, Horus would have bee a natural choice to 
associate with he Kingship, since the connection would necessarily have had greater 
Fesanance and significance 

The concept of Hors as Greatest) god, lord of heaven is given unique artistic 
expression in the ivory comb of Diet, fom the carly First Dynasty. Here, Horus is 
sepeeseated in three Toms: the celestial fulcon, whose oulspeead wings form the vault of 
e sky: the solar deiy, a falcon which tnverses he sky in the celestial boat; and 
incarnate in he person of the King (the falcon atop the King's seet). This exceptional 
Work of art is obe of the earliest andl most concise theological expositions. It expresses 
he essential elements of the King's association with Honus and the role of Horus as the 
supreme deity. Moreover, Ht ‘presents concisely and clearly the ceneral tenet binding 
together ancient Egyptian civilisation, he nation that the king fulîls a sole on earth under 
he peotective wings of the celestial fileon in heaven (Quirke 1992.212) 


Tie dual onarchy 


One of he mest extraordinary intellectual achievements of Egypi’s frst kings was the 
conespt of the dual monarchy. From the very beginning of the Egy pian slate, official 
ideology and iconography presented the real as a unioa of two halves, The Two Lands. 
The pervasiveness of such imagery in the ancient Egypûan sources highlights the 
imagination and creativity of Egypls carly dite. The kings who erated the Fgyptian 
state fromm ihe competing powers of the Predymastie period sucezeded in formulating « 
Concept of rule which guaranised an absolutely pivotal role for the monarchy. The 
insiution of kingship was projected as the sole force which held the country together, 
wand the dual nature of he monarchy ras expressed in the king's regalia, ia his inulary, 
and in royal rituals and festivals. This concept_the harmony of opposites, a totality 
embracing paired contests chimed so effectively with the Egypian world-view hat the 


insitution of kingship aequired what has been called a ‘transcendent significance’ 
(Frankfort 1948:19). This helps to explain the centrality of the iasttution to Egyptian 
culture, and its longeviwy (Frankfort 1948-15-16). Even when central authority broke 
down, is ir did during the Intermediate Periods, the Egyptians retuned unilingly 1o the 
established model of govemment. The promulgation of such a powerful ideological 
concept from the very beginning of the Egyptian state effectively masked the political 
realities of the state focmation process, and made a return to the fragmentation of he 
Predynastie period ideologically inconceivable (e1. Frankfort 1948.20). 


The royal family and the ruling class 


The uppermost register of the Scorpion macehead shows a series of standards with a 
dejected lapuwing hnging by a sope from each one. ln he hieroglyphic script, the lapwing 
repceseated the rH yt Ihe cotamon people of Egypt. Hence, the symbolism of this part of 
ihe Scorpion macehead seems clear, if a litle uncomfortable to the modem mind: the 
populace of Egypt is quite Iterally subject to the divine authority of the King. The 
significance of fhe seene may go further, and may illuminate un aspect of ancient 
Egyplian society which is oaly barely atiistal. This is its division ino emo sparte 
groups, fhe mass of the populace (N y0) and the ruling class (o 1) (Malek 198634; 
faines 1905-133) 

The composition of the # yt is aly clear fiom the contexts in which the won is 
used; it refers to the general population, The significance of the term p.1 is less obvious, 
though it must refer to the dilte, he members of he king's entourage. A high-ranking title 
borne by oflicials fioen the Fist Dynasty onwards is Iri,p £, which seems 1o indicate a 
member of the p 7" Although it later became merely an honorife tile, marking am 
individual's illustrious rank within the foyal administratioa, in origin the tile seems lo 
have had a more specific sense, designating a member of the ruling class. I is quite ikely 
that the p £ ocigaally comprised the soyal Kinsmen who, by virtue of heir blood ties 1o 
he king, however distant, shared something of the supematural authority vested in he 
ruler (Frankîoct 1948:53). The evidence suggests that in early ime all the high officials 
of he central govemmeat were royal selations (Malek 1986:35). This system seems to 
have broken down during the Ol Kingdom when persons of nonsoyal birth were 
appointed to important positions within he administration 

The distineton between 1he populace and ihe royal Kinsmen must have been an 
important one, dictating how authoeity wras exercised in the Early Dynastic court. The 
formal separation of the ruling class ffonn the rest of the population provides a valusble 
insight into the mechanisms of early royal goverment in Egypt. appears that access to 
political power was carefully restricted, to enhance the absolute authoniy of the kingship 
and emphasise ts supematural remoteness fron the general populate. 


Bary drastic Haymt 158 


ICONOGRAPHY: SYMBOLS OF ROYALTY 


Royal regalia 


I1n the Early Dynastic period as in later times, the eroums, seeptres and other elements of 
royal egala had a dunî role: power and protection. At he most basic level, they served 10 
identify the king and to set him apart from the sest of humanity (Quike 1990:10) 
Moceover, hey conveyed his authority, both supernatural (as the gods representative) 
and carlhly (as head of state and supreme military commander) just as crowns and 
seeptres do in modern monarchies, They also had an amuletle function, to protect the 
King from danger and fom the malign focees which were believed 1o threaten the 

Comparatively litle has been writen about the various items of royal insignia. None 
“he less, It is clear that each cbjcet had its our significance and origins. Whilst some of 
he chaeterislie royal tributes predate the foundation of the Egyptian stale, others 
were added 1o the developing iconography of divine Kingship during the course of the 
Fist Dynasty. By the end of the Second Dynasty, royal iconography had been formalised 
sand changed litle during the succeeding millennium 


Seeptees and staf 


A seeptne or staf is one of the most widespread and ancient symbols of authority (Figure 
6.1), This was certainly rue of ancient Egypt, as demonstrated by the hieroglyph for 
"nobleman, oflicial" (st) which shows a man carrying a long stave of office ia font of 
him, One of the earliest indications of a hierarchical society comes fiom the carly 
Predynastie site of e-Omari in Lower Egypt. Aa otherwise simple grave contained the 
skeleton of a man, buried with a wooden staf. This has been interpreted as an indication 
Of ihe dead man's special status within his society. Whether he exercised religious oF 
political suhority is less important than the overt recognition of his staus by means of a 
distinctive ‘badge of office" A fragmentary wooden stalk, carved 10 resemble a bundle of 
seals, was found in an eaely First Dynasty mastaba at Saqqan. Similar Fagmenls were 
feeovered Rom Early Dynastic royal tombs at Abydos (Fischer 1978-21) As symbols of 
authority por excellence, it is not surprising that staffs were anciently associated wilh the 
Segalis of Egyplian Kingship. A wooden label of Den fom Abyos shows the King 
carrying a long staff, very similar to that shown in the sr hieroglyph (Petrie 1900: pls 
X14, XIV.) Afler all, the king ras the highest ofticial in the land, he nobleman above 
sall others, His unique position at the head of Egyptian society was usually recognised by 
more distinctive insignia, reserved for ihe kingship. An actual example of a royal scepuw 
was discovered by Pevie in one of the chambers of Khasekhemwy's tomb at Abydos 
(Petrie 1901-27, pl. IKI) The seeptre was fashioned from cylinders of polished sard, 
decorated with “double hands of thick gold which encircle the sceptre al every founth 
cylinder (Peteie 1901:27). the whole held together by a copper rod. Two Ragments of the 
ısceptre were found, one 2 inches, the other 5 inches ia length. Because of it: slender and 
faglle construction, Pee concluded that it was "only just strong enough 1o cay is own 
weigh’, and therefore identified ix as a ceremonial, soyal soepe (Petrie 1901.27). 


Figure 6.1 The staff of office. Fragmentary ivory 
label of Den from Abydos. The king is 
wearing the Khat-hend-dress and carries a 
mace and long stafl, the former a symbol 
of royal authority, the latter a recognised 
mark of high office in ancient Egypt (after 
Petrie 1900: pl. XIV.) 


A variant of the long staf was the mke-stal. This is characterised by û nodule 
approximately half-wray down the shaf 1n origin a defensive weapon, fhe mitv-staff 
seems later 1o have astumed ‘ceremoaialeven priestly significance” (FD Friedman 
1905:20). Stone vessels of Aneljib fron Saqqars and Abydos depict a statue of he King 
holding the mkvstaff, and these inscriptions are closely paralleled on the northernmost 
relief panel Rom beneath the Step Pyramid, where Neyerlthet is shown holding a mks 
saf (Kemp 198:58, fg. 19; 1.Di Friedman 1995). ln addition to the mksstaff and 
simpler staff of office, royal iconography of the Early Dynastic period disinguishes two 
different forms of seepue, each of which emphasised a parieular aspect of he rulers 
authority 


Bary drastic tart 160 


THE HEQA-SCEPTRE 


The symbol of rule with the longest history seems to be the shephend's crook or hg 
ıseepure. This is entirely appropriate, since the ermok symbolised the very concept of le, 
and was employed as ihe Nieroglyph for the Egyplan wonl, ‘rule, ruler” (hf3). The 
earliest example of a hqi-seepue comes Rom tomb U-S4T at Abydos, dated to late 

taqada IH (Naqaula 11d). The tomb, a simple pix cut ia the desert, contsined the upper part 
of a limestone hf3-sceptre (Leclant and Clore 1993: pl, XXI fig. 26; Dreyer ef al 
1996). The earliest surviving complete Aq3-seeptre comes from another grave in the same 
cemetery, tomb Uj (Dreyer 193b: 11), This was the burial of a lale Predynastie nuler of 
he Thinile region and is unique in several respects. It is by far the largest tomb of is date 
ıanyıthere in Egypt, suggesting that ts owner exercised unrivalled political and economic 
authority. The status of the deceased is expressed not only in the size and contents of the 
toeb, bur also in the ivory hq3-sceplee found in the northeastern chamber. I is clear that 
he shepherd's crook was already established as 8 symbol of rule by late Predynustie 
times, and that it formed part of the ruler's regalia. The carliest repcesentation of a king 
holding a hq3-seepee is 4 small statuelte of Ninegjer (Simpson 1956), As in ler tines, 
the king holds the crook across his chest, balancing the Rall whieh he holds in the other 
vand. The symbolism of fhe hq3-sceptre is quite easily understood. Metaphorically, the 
king was the shepherd of his people, guiding and protecting them, In common with some 
Of the other hems of royal regalia discussed below, fhe Mfi-sceptre indicates he 
pastoralist aspect of Egyptian society. Many of the metaphors of royal authority are 
derived from the animal Kingdon and from he sphere of animal husbandry, emphasising 
the close interaction between the carly Egyptians and their natural environment (ef. 
Staehelin 1984. 


THE WASSCEPTRE 


The second type of seepire closely assoclated with kingship is the wdssceptre (K Martin 
1986b). This ıs a long stafî wilh a stylised animal's head at one end and two curved 
prongs ut the other. Hts origins may well go back 1o the Predynastic period, although he 
earliest known representations of the wîs-seepire date to the First Dynasty. An ivory 
comb of Diet shows two such seepres supporting the vault of heaven, symbolised by the 
ouspread wings of the celestial fileon, A wîrxsecpure, perhaps of ivory (like the k4 
seepure fom Abydos tomb Uj} was among the hoard of vodve objects excavated by 
Petrie in he early temple at Abydos (Petrie 1903: pl. 2.11). Like the sheplbendl's crook, 
the wîıxseeptue embodied aulhoriy/ and was used as û hieroglyph 10 write the word 
‘dominion’ (34). The w3-seeptre may have had both utilitarian and symbolic value; a 
origin, it seems 1o have been used 1 control animmals, although its exact functioa has not 
been established beyond doubt. It has been interpreted as a shepherd's staf? (Kaploay 
1986:1374), but the shape of the head has suggested to others that he staff may originally 
have been used to goad donkeys or mules (K Martin 19868). A possible connection with 
snakes has also ben mooted. The suggestion that “lhe w3, prototype as staff or scepter 
originally may have been a dried bull's penis (Cordon and Schwabe 1995-186) seems 
rather unlikely and has not found general support 

As a symbol of power, the ır 3ı-seeptre could be held by deities as well as by he king, 
sand it may have been 'prlrmurily an anibute of the gods" (Fischer 1978-21). For example, 


on sealings of Peribsen ftom Abydos, he god Ash is depicted holding a wãs-scepue 
(Pee 1901: pls XXLIT6, XXILITE 9). The wdu-seeptre iw anthropomorphised in reliefs 
as carly as the Third Dynasty. On the Netjeriklaet relief panels, w3s-aceptres hold ns 
and one appears 1o dance (FD.Friedkman 1995). The ivory comb of Djet, already 
mentioned, illustrates the other symbolic function of the w3-secplre: as the support of 
heaven, By extension, the w3ucseeptre ‘rmay..allude to the divine power that supports 
and protects royal lile” (FD. Friedman 1905:26 It is probably true 1o cay that he 
symbolised a divine authority, whereas he hqi-sceptre represented a more secular power 
and vras the pre-eminent symbol of earthly rule. 


Te ail 


The ail has already been mentioned as he usual companion to the crook. However, 
originally the two tems of regalia do not seem to have been so closely connected. The 
"ail appears alone on some of the carliest repcesentations of royal ceremonial, making it 
one of ihe most ancient symbols of the office of Kiagship. The King depicted oa the boss 
side of the Metropolitan Museum knife handle (dated to the lute Predyraslic period, 
Naqada IIlb, c- 3100 BC) caries the flail alone (Williams and Logan I987: fig 1), A 
very similar representation occurs oa the Narmer macehead fiom Hierakonpolis, and this 
Klng is also shown canyiag ihe fail on his ceremonial palette. A further example fromm 
the easly First Dynasty is a mud seal-impression oan the feign of Djer which shows he 
king carrying the fall (Pewie 1901: pl. XV.108). To judge from he stuuente of Nineljer, 
by the Second Dynasty the flail and crook had become associated and were henecforth 
usually depicted together. The Mail is carried by Nejerikhet on his relief panels where it 
seems lo serve as a general ‘symbol of authority’ (F.D.Friedemun 1995.22). Like the hq3- 
and sede-seeptres, the fail seems 1o have originated in the sphere of animal husbandry. 
Used 1o goad livestock, he Mail was an obvious symbol of the rulers coercive power, As 
shepherd of his ioek, ihe king encouraged his people as well a5 restraining then: this is 
he dual symbolise ol the ail and crook 


Te bull's tail 


The influence of the animal world oa royal iconography was twofold. As well as holding 
items of regalia taken from the sphere of animal husbandry 1o emphasise his role as 
shepherd of his people__ihe King was imbued wit the powers of nature, most easily 
epeeseated in their animal form Hence, on some of the commemorative palettes front 
ihe period of state formation, the king is portrayed as a lion (Battlefield Paletle) or as « 
wild bull (Bull Pale, Narmer Palette). Both animals embodied unrestrained feroei 

and the representation ûf the ruler as a fierce wild animal conveyed in graphic terms his 
role as defender of created order and ruthless opponent of the forecs of chaos. Soon afer 
ihe establishment of the Egyptian stute, the iconography of kingship underwent a 
conselidalion and codification. ln the prvcess, some of the motifs adopted in the lte 
Predynastie period were discarded, particularly those borrowed ftom contemporary 
Mesopotamian iconography This was also the case with overt depietions of the Riler as 
an animal. We can speculate thal, perhaps for theological seasons, it was no longer 
considered appropriate to represent the King in such 4 way. Nevertheless, the animal 


Bary drastic Haye 162 


potency of kingship rermained important ideologically, and was henceforth expressed in 
ibdler rays. The king's mame could corporate such notions Hence, he name of the 
lete Predynastie king, ‘Scorpion’, seems to be an expression of dangerous animal power. 
In later periods, King: adopted more explicit animal names such as “Suong Bull’. Indeed, 
he bull appears to have been the animal most closely associated with the king. The inate 
power of the bull its viliy and strength was conveyed by means of 3 bull's tail, 
Nom by the king suspended fons the back of his Kilt (Stuehelin 1984.615) The earliest 
Known representation of the bull's tail appears oa the Scorpion macehead, and hencefoath 
it became a regular component of royal dress. 


Sandals 


The Narmer Palete illustrates another element of royal insignia, the king's sandals (ef. 
"Seyfised 1984). As, quite iterally, the point of contact beeen the King and the land over 
which he ruled, the foyal sandals were imbued wilh a religious importance, They were, 
herefore, entrusted to a special member of the King’s entourage who would have enjoyed 
intimate acess to the King. The sandal-bearer depicted on Nanmer's moauments follows 
close behind his sovereign and is lbelled as "the servant of the ruler’. The king's sandals 
also had a symbolic role i the ctermal struggle between order anû chaos. The King's 
primary task was 1o crush Egypt's (and creations) enemies, represented as he 
Îhabicants of acighhouring lands, In later periods, this victocy was symbolically 
achieved by having Egypt s enemies depicted on ihe king's footstool and on the 
pavement of the royal palace, Every time the king walked on the pavement or placed his 
feet on the footsteol, the enemies would be conquered by syrmputhelic magic. ln each 
case, he agent of victory was he king's sandals This belief finds eloquent expression oa 
a commemocalive stela erected by Khasekhem at Hierakonpolis. On it, the King is 
described as ‘effective sandal against the hilkcounties'; in other words, a successful 
conqperor of the forces threatening Egypt and the cosmos. 


Te umes 


The earliest depiction of the urseus—the rearing cobra on the king's brow probably 
dates to the reign of Den. The scene in question is the famous ivory label which shows 
he king siting an enemy captive (Spencer 199387, fig. 61). The king wears a long wig 
and the urseus adoms his forehead. A second urseus appears on the Wepwawet standard 
hich precedes he King. There is some doubt about he label's authenticity (Johnson 
1990:6 but a closely coparsble depiction of the King on a f#agmentary label ftom 
Abydos (Petrie 1900: pls XL8, XIV. tends to support a First Dynasty date. None the 
less, the inclusion of the urseus in the royal insignis of this carly period is remarkable. 
“Such a fenare next appears la the carly Third Dynasty, on a selicf of Netjerikhet ions the 
Wadi Maghara, Sinai. The adopûon of he urseus into royal iconography seems to be 
ıanotlier example ol the ianovatien whic charseterises the reign of Den. 

The symbolic function of he uraeus is clear. The serpent goddess was a potent symbol 
of ‘prntectioa, power and beneficence' (Johnsoa 190:190). Attached to the rule's bron, 
he rising cobra spat fire at the king's enemies. The ureus thus embodied both 
apotropale, protective power and aggressive latent towards the forces of disoeder 


(Kk Marin 1986a). In eaڱly‎ soyal seenes, the king is ofien preeded by the standard of the 
jsekalkgod Wepwawet, ihe opener Of the ways. As the trailblazer foc he King, 
Wepwawet may also be accompanied by a urseus serpel, 1o provide added protection 
(Jolanson 1990-53) This is the case on the ivory label of Den and on the Third Dynasty 
ırelieks fron the Sinai (Jonson 1990: figs 104-6 


Crowns and headdresses 


Perhaps the most distinctive elements of the royal regalia are the various crowns and 
hend-dresses wom by the king on different oecusions. Three crowns are alested in the 
Early Dynastic period: the red crown, the white crown and the combined ‘double crow’ 
Instead ofa crown, the King might wear a cloth headdress. Two different types figure in 
Early Dynastic depictions: a long headdress (that) and an early focenamner of the 
archetypal neme headdress. 


THE RED CROWN 


There is, as yet, no satisfactory explanation for the ocigin of the two peincipal crowns, the 
red and he white (Figures 62 and 63), Both seen to have originated in Upper EY, 
which saw ihe frst moves towards political centralisation. A sherd Rom a large black. 
topped redcware vessel of late Naqada 1 dale, from the sile of Naqada iself, bears a 
representation of the red crow in relief (Payne 1994-94, fg, 4.174: Baines 1995-149, 
fig. 3.1). Although he red crown is associated in histocic times with Lower Egypt is 
generally assumed that it originated ss fhe distinctive hesdpiece of the Prelynastle rulers 
of Naqada. The colour red was traditionally associated with Seth, the local god of 
Naqada. The shape of the crown is quite distinctive, but again its symbolic meaning is 
unkonown. The curly protuberance at he fiont of the erown hus been linked swith the bee 
(eoanected wilh kingship ffom st least the middle of the First Dynasty, through the tille 
nwî, ‘he of the sedge and bee’), and also with goddess Neth, an important Lower 
Egyptian deity. There is an obscure passage in he Pyramid Texts of Uns whieh may 
refer 1o the curly par of the red crown, but it remains poorly understood. 

"From the period of state formation onwards, he red crow seems to have symbolised 
he king's authority in the nocthem hulf of his realm As such, it is wor by Narmer oa his 
ceremonial palette and macchesd. N has been suggested that 1he Scorpion mucehead 
originally showed a figure of the king wearing the red crown to balance the gure in the 
while crown on the prrserved portion (Cialowiez 1991). In this case, the Scocpioa 
ımacehead would be the earliest example of he King wearing the red crown, predating 
he Narmer monuments by a short ime, 


Early drastic Hame 161 


Figure 6.2 The red crown. Early representations of 
the crown later associated with Lower 
Egypt (1)a red crown modelled in relief 
on a sherd of black-topped red ware from 
the Predynastic cemetery at Naqada (now 
in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) (after 
Payne 1993: fig. 34, no. 774); (2) Narmer 
wearing the red crown, as shown on his 
ceremonial macchead from Hierakonpolis 
(after Quibell 1900: pl. XXVIB); (3) 
Narmer wearing the red crown, as shown 


on his ceremonial palette from 
Hierakonpolis (alter Kemp 1989:42, fg. 
12); (4) a shrine to the red crown, perhaps 
located in the north-westem Delta, shown 
onan ivory label of Djer from Abydos 
(aller Emery 1961:59, fig. 20). Not to 
same scale. 


THE WHITE CROWN 


The white crown, associated in historic times with Upper Eyp, is first attested later than 
ihe red crown, but is directly associated with fhe ruler somewhat earlier. The earliest 
known depiction of fhe white crown is on a ceremonial incense burner fom Cemetery L 
wat Qustul in Lower Nubia (Williams I986: pls 34, 38). Tomb L24 coatained a variety of 
prestige objects, and in all probabiliy belonged to a lute Predynastie King of Lower 
Nubia, contemporary with the ruler buried in Abydos 1omb Uj (Nsqada 1Ila2, £. 3150 
BC). The Qustul lacease bummer is a remarkable object of supreme imıponance for the 
development of Egyptian royal iconography. The incised scenes around the edge of he 
object Include The feptesentation of a sented ruler. wearing the tall white crown. Evidence 
of close contacts benween the rulers of Qustul and their contemporaries st Hicrakonpolis 
may suppod the theory that the white crown originated at the later shte. A second, 
slightly later royal object from Upper Egypt bears 4 similar repeesentation of a royal 
figure wearing ihe white crown This i the Mewopoltan Museum kalle handle, 
mentioned already in connection with he fail. The king holding the fail wears the wile 
Crown. Like his counterpart on the Qustul incense burner, he is leilîed as the ruler by 
the rosette hieroglyph_also tested oa the Seorpion macchend, the Narmer Palette and 
ımacehesd in font of his face. Likely to be contemporary with he Metropolis 
Museum knife handle is a socket inscription nesr Aswan whieh shows a ruler figure 
(Gidentitied as such by he fan-bearer who stands behind hin: compare the presence of 
fan bearees in attendance upon the king on the Scocpion and Narmer macehends) wearing 

ul, pointed headdress, probably a schenmutic rendering of the white crown or a very 
similar item of regalia (Baines, personal cormmunication). 

‘The Nanner Palette indicates that the white crown was the superior of the two crows, 
ısinee the figure of the king wearing the white crown is significantly larger than the figure 
wearing the sed croum. The superiority of fhe white crowra may have derived om ils 
intimate association with the royal line of Hierakoapolis, which played a decisive role i 
he unifiealion of Egypt. The white crown retained this superiority throughout Egyptian 
history. More than simple items of regalia, the red and while crowns were innbued with 
magical significance and were worshipped as cult objects in their own right (see Chapter 
5 


Barly dynastic teyre 166 


Figure 63 The white crown. Early representations of 
the erown later associated with Upper 
Egypt (1)a royal figure wearing the white 
eren, shown on an incised, decorated 
incense-bumer from tomb 4 in Cemetery 
Lat Qustul, Lower Nubia (after Williams 
1986: pl. 34); (2) a late Predynastic Upper 
Egyptian king wearing the white crown, 
shown on a carved ivory knife handle of 
unknown provenance (now in the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) 
(aller Williams and Logan 1947-273, fig. 


1): (3) King ‘Scorpion’ wearing the while 
crow, as shown on his ceremonial 
macehead from Hicrakonpolis (after 
Spencer 1993-56, fg. 36); (4) Narmer 
wearing the white crown, as shown on his 
ceremonial palette from Hicrakonpolis 
(after Kemp 1989:42, fig. 12). Not to same 
scale. 


THE DOUBLE CROWN 


The logical development of combining the red and while eouwns into û double crow, 
symbolising he king's rule of the Two Lands, occurred i the middle of the Firsî 
Dynasty. A mekeut iaseription of Djct fom the western desert apparently shows the 
‘falcon atop the king's serek wearing the double crown (Legrain 1903221, fig. 7). f he 
repo is accurate, this inscription would represent the cartiest known occurrence of the 
double cron, predating the more famous Abydos label of Den by a generation. The 
invention of the double crown is usually tributed to the lauer king. Two labels of Des 
show he king in double crown (Perse 1900: pls X13XIV.7, XL14=XV.16 The 
innovation of the double crown clearly allowed artists to xepreseat the totality of the 
king's auhoriy in a moce compact form, and, ss such, marke the inereasing 
sophistication of royal iconography as The First Dynasiy progresset. 


THE KHAT. AND NEMES-HEAD-DRESSES 


A further innovation in royal iconography seems to have occurred in the reign of Den, 
namely the appearınce of the long headdress (* 30) (contra Etoa-Kruss 1977.26, 
3, On he Nery label whieh shows the “frst time of smiling the eastleenet)", he King 
wears this headdress, ts backpiece reaching halfway down his back. A fragmentary 
ivory label of the same king fom Abydos shows Den wearing the h 3t carrying a mce 
horizontally in one hand and a long staff vertically in the other (Petrie 1900: pls X1 
XIV). These are the only depictions of a King orm the fist two dynasties whieh show 
nim wearing a headdress other than one of the crowns. A relief of Netjeriklnet from the 
Wadi Maghara, Sinai, shows me King wearing a ‘kerchief which may be he A 3% 
although he rudimenary rendecing "does not permit posiive ideotification (Eaton. 
Krnuss 1977-26, a. 38). The significance of the Khathesd-dress at this early period is 
unknown. 

The state state of Netjetikhet from his serdab in the Step Pyramid complex is the 
earliest example of another soyal headdress, the nemes. This was o become the 
archetypal soyal head-covering, surviving in representadons of the ruler unl the end of 
pharaonic civilisation. The headdress as it appears on the state of Nejerikhet is a 
Torenumer of the classic shape, having large and bulky font lappets with pointed 
facings With the appearance ofthe nenas, all the essential elements of the king's regalia 
had been introduced, and the foundations of royal iconography had been firmly 
established 


Bary drastic iayrt 168 


The Hing smltes his enemies 


The aforementioned ivory label of Den depicts one of the most eharucteristie actions of 
ihe Eypliun ruler: with his am upraised, he smiles a bound captive cowering at his feet. 
The iestrument of subjugation is he piriform mace, a weapon anestel arrhaeologically 
“from the Naqada 1 period. The mace was a potent symbol of royal power, and could be 
carried by Ihe king ia her siuuations as part of his insigela Of office, as on the 
fragmentary ivory label of Den mentioned above. None the less, i is in smmiting scenes 
that the mace features most coramonly as an alrîbute of kingship. The motif of the ruler 
smiling his enemies is of great anîquity. A recently discovered late Naqada 1 painted 
potery vessel fom Cemetery U at Abydos shows a royal (2) figure smiing a group of 
bound captives. This vessel is the very earliest ieonographic evidence 1o date or 
Egyptian kingship, yet I already peesents the motif that characterises depictions of the 
ruler throughout he succeeding three-and-a-half thousand years. The king siting his 
Enemies may be regarded as Ihe quintessential soyal activity shown in Egyptian 
ieonography. The action emphasised the king's primary duty: to safeguard created order 
by stacking the forces of disorder (Hall 1986) Just as the barren and hostile deserts 
whieh surrounded Egypt represented the antithesis of the Senile Nile valley, so he 
peoples to the south, west and cast of Egypt were cast as embodying the forees that 
opposed and threatened fhe Egyptians and their way of life. 


"Siandards ow early royal momuments 


On many royal monuments from the lute Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods, groups 
of standards are shown accompanying he ruler. The Scorpion and Narnmer macchends 
and he Narmer Palete each shows s similar group of standards in attendance on the king. 
Further standards, in other contexts, are depicted on four ceremonial paletes fon he 
period of state formation (he so-called Hunters’, Louure, Ratleeld and Libyan 
palettes) 


Forms and contexts 


Alogether, ten different standards are atested: an eastsign; the Min (thunderbolt?) 
symbol a canine with the 1484-devlee; a second unidentified canine; an ibis; a single oF 
double falcon; a falcon perched on a crescent; the Sedranimal; 3 curious bag-shaped 
object, and the desert hieroglyph (Figure 64). 

Much debate has surmwunded the proper dentification of the stundards, their origins 
and symbolism, The canine with he MMdevice has been Klentited as Wepwawet 
(Kaiser 1960:1223, and this would seem to be confirmed by a Third Dynasty sealing 
fom Beit Khallaf which shows an Hdenical canine standard labelled as Wepwawet 
(Garstang 1902 pl. VIL). The ibis stundanl may be connected with the god Thod 
ıalthougl this is by no means certain (Kaiser 160:126) 


9 0 


چ 


Figure 6.4 Standards on early royal monuments. The 
ten different types of standard depicted on 
ceremonial palettes and maceheads of the 
late Predynastic period and carly First 
Dynasty: (1) placenta; (2) canine and šdêd- 
device; (3) falcon (after Kemp 1989:42, 
fig. 12); (4) mountain-sign; (5) Seth- 
animal; (6) Min-sign (after Spencer 
1993:56, fig. 36): (7) cast-sign (after Davis 
1992:94, fig. 28): (8) falcon on crescent 
(alter Spencer 1993:56, fig. 36; (9) 
canine; (10) ibis (after Davis 1992144, 
fig. 37). Not to same scale. 


Barly dynastic taymt 1 


The falcon very probably represents the god Horus: the twin falcons, Horus and Seth 
(Kaiser 1960:1234). The falco on a crescent may represent Anti, he local god of he 
wellh Upper Egyptian nome; a similar motif occurs on an elaborate alabaster vessel 
fiom the "Main Deposit st Hierakonpolis. The bag-ahaped sign, later associated vith the 
god Khonsu, was fist explained as the royal placenta (Seligman and Murray 19111 

lackman 1916; Frnakiort 1948). Other scholars have hesitated io accept this 
îdentifieatîon (Kaiser 1960:127), suggesting instead a throne cushion (Helek 1954:27 n, 
99, 31; F.D.Friedman 1909544-5) or a variant of the emblem of Nekhen (Posener 1965) 
However, ethnographic parallels from other Hamltie Afiean cultures provide support for 
the possible deilicatien of the royal placenta in ancient Egypt, and there are convincing 
etymological reasons fo linking Khonsu with the soyal placenta. I is possible that the 
royal placenta was segarded as the King's stillbom his; i may have bee associated with 
ihe royal ko, the divîne essence passe for ruler to nuler which played an important part 
iin Egyptian kingship ideology Hon 1he earliest times (Frankfort 1948:78). 


Symbolism and significance 


Tuo separate groups of standards can be distinguished. Those depicted on the late 
Predynasic palettes and on the upper register of he Scorpion macehead probably 
repeeseat the mest important divine symbols of the period OF state formation (Kaiser 
1959:1301). A seeond_and for the present study, more informative group comprises 
those standards which accompany the person of the King on the Scorpion and Narmer 
monuments. These are clearly more than & collection of the most important Upper 
Fgyplian deities, since several notable gods and goddesses are missing form the group 
(for example, Seth, Min and Haho) (Kaiser 1960-127). On all three monuments the 
collection of standards is strikingly similar. suggesting that these particular emblems 
were closely connected with the king (ef, Frankfort 1948:92), The following same four 
standards appear on both monuments of Name: two falcons, Wepwrawet with the Mli- 
device, and the royal placenta. Early Dynastic royal monumenls afer the reign of Narmer 
show daly Wepwawet and the royal placenta. They accompany the figure Of a king on & 
relief block in the Cairo Museum, thought to be from the Early Dynastic temple at 
Gebelein (W.S.Smith 1949: pl. 30.4), on a relief Fagment from the Heliopolis shine of 
Netjerikhet (W.S.Smith 1949: Iig. 52), and oa the same king's relief panels fron the Step 
Pyramid eoplex (Firth and Quibell 1035: pls 15-17, 40-2) 

‘For he ieterpretation of these standards luter parallels are sevealing, 1a scenes of the 
Sekfesival Rom the solar temple of Niuserms (Fifth Dynasty), similar standards are 
named the nun Hr, ‘followers of Horus? (e, Kaiser 109:130), a term also applied to 

ve semi-legendary preuication kings in the Turin Canon. For this reason, the 
standards have been linked with the soyal ancestons, and it is true that the worship of 
ancestors was an important element of kingship fom the earliest times (Frunkfoct 
194891). An altemutive suggestion is that he group of four standards on the Nammer 
Palate and macehesd were symbols of the Thinite royal house (Frsaktort 148:93). 1f he 
precise origin of the standards eludes us, it none the less seems likely that each 
Smbolised a particular aspect of kingship 


TITLES AND NAMES: EXPRESSIONS OF DIVINE KINGSHIP 


One ofthe most accessible sources for Early Dynastic kingship is the names of the Kings 
themselves (cf, Weill 1961, chapter 18). As in many ancient (and modern) societies, so in 
ancient Egypt names were Full of meaning. They were often selected to express paricul 
beliefs or concems, This was indeed he case with the kings” names and tiles, which 
were naturally imbued wih added religious andor poltiesl significance. Cenain 
concepts are frequently expressed in royal names, such as strength, skill and fecundity 
(Flussen and Valbelle 1992:20). The King's oficial titulary may be considered ss ‘an 
ıclaborate statement regarding his divine nature’ (Frankfort 1948:46). Hence, if we can 
‘ranslate of at least imterpeet Early Dynastic royal names, we should gain imporant 
insights lato hov the cary Egyptians regarded he office of Kiagship, and whieh aspecls 
of his sole a particular king chose 1o emphasise in the tinulary he adepled at his accession 
(Shaw and Nicholson 1995-153), As we shall see, two ideas in particular are stressed in 
he royal inulary: the fact that the King presides over a dual monarchy, and the divine 
ıstatus ofthe king as the incamation of Horus (Quirke 1990:10) 

Prior to the development of the fivefold Hitulary common in later times, kings in the 
Early Dynastic period bore up to three different names or titles, One of these is attested 
ftom the lute Predynastic period, others were added during the First Dynasty. The Horus 
name, writen in a rectangular frame or sere, expressed an aspect of the king's nature i 
his role as he earihly manifestalioa of the sky g0û Hocus, Many Early Dynastic kings are 
sanested solely by their Horus name, which was the clement of he royal tinulary most 
Commonly used on monuments sd in inscriptions. A second soyal ttle was addled ia the 
middle of the First Dynasty. This was anvt-hîy; ‘he of the sedge and ber’, a title which 
expressed the many dunlifies over which he king exercised rule: Upper and Lower 
Egypt, ihe Blsck Land (eulivarion) and he Red Land (desert, the realms of day and 
walsh, the natural and the supernatural, and s0 on (cf Quirke 1990:11). The later king lists 
ofien referred to rulers by the name that followed this newr.bi tile. Towards the end of 
he First Dyasty, a third tide was inuoduced, first as part of the nsw-hiy name, and laler 
ıa a separate Hite in its own tight: buy, he ‘Two Ladies’, refering 1o the pata deities 
of Upper and Lower Egypt, he vulture goddess Nekhbet f Elkab and the cobrs goddess 
Wadjet of Buto. The nh, tille expressed the king's dual role as king of Upper and Lower 
Egypt. Comparatively few nbıy names are preserved in contemporary Early Dynastic 
sources, The origins of a fourth tile, fhe poorly undentood ‘Golden Horus name’. may 
e ced in royal inscriptions of the First and Third Dynasties, and in the annals Of he 
Palermo Stone. The cartouche, an oval frame which enclosed the king's birth name, frst 
appears at he end ofthe Third Dynasty. 

Anempts 1o read meaning imo the varying use of different titles may be misguided. 
The composition of the royal titulary seems to have bee rather fluid ia the Early 
Dynastic period and carly Old Kingdom, not necessarily following the strict rules chat 
modem scholars have tried to discern o even impose (ef. Schott 1956) A cenain 
exîbility in practie_even as late as The begianing of the Fourth Dynasty-wis indicated 
by inscriptions of Nejerikhet and Sefer, For example, relief fisgment fromm the 
Heliopolis shrine of Nejerikhet gives the sequence nent-Bîy N ric 1 wrien within the 
panels of the King's serelh, the upper par of which ecloses the Horus name, also N i 
FS Scho 195666, fg. 3, whilst a socket inscription of Snefens from the Wadi 


Barly drastic teyre 172 


'hara shows the king's nswhiy nhiy name (hete the same as his Horus name, Vb. 
mî 1) sad “Golden Hocus name (Sufi) bots enclosed within a canouehe, reserved in 
iter times for the nswrbity name (S, Scho 1956:64, fig. 1). Clearly, easly ia the 
development of the royal tirulary, the various elements were, 1o some exter 
interchangeable and could be combined in several different ways, The message that the 
ilulary as a whole eoaveyed may have been more important thar ihe precise combination 
or ordering of the various names and epithets 


The Horus tile 


“The primary title was the Horus ttle, This ras adopted by the king at his accession and 
ıaubsequently used throughout his reign. A modem parallel is the ango, fhe name 
adopted at the secession of a Japanese emperor and by which he is always known afer 
his death. Thus, the enmperor known in the West by his personal name Hieohito is referred 
1o in Japan as Showa (radiant harmony’), ln much the same way, the personal names of 
he Early Dymastie Egypuan Kings were apparently used very rarely. Instead, 
contemporary monuments recorded ihe King's Horus name. This comprised three 
elements: a phrase or epithet, writen within a etangular panel—şepeesenting 3 section 
of ihe palace façade _ surmounted by a falcoa symbolising he god Horus (ef Dreyer 
To0sb: 54, n. 19) The name expressed the close selationship benween the king and the 
celestial dey he embodied. As a ezlestial deity, Hons was remote yet allseeing, 
enfolding within his wings the entire cosmos. A god with such qualities evidently 
provided Egypt's early Kings with a powerful syrabol and metaphor for their own earthly 
file (Quirke 1990.21). The serek surmouted by a gure of the god wras adopled as & 
potent symbol of kingship during late Predynastic times. The earliest serebhs wrere empty, 
he symbol alone coaveying the neeessiry message of royal power. Towanls the 
culmination of the unifieution process, he King began 10 wite an epithet within the 
serekl (cf Barta 1990). This epithet expressed a particular aspect of the god Honus 
immanent in his earthly incarmation, the King (ef. Frankfort 194846. I is likely that the 
name of the god himself wras intended to be real as part of the name as a whole (S. Schott 
1956:56) 

Alhough ancient Egyptian royal names are notoriously dificult to translate—the 
individual elements comprising a name have been likened to a newspaper banner 
hendiine, ther hun a grammatically correct sentence_insights ino Early Dynustic 
kingship can be gained fiom an analysis of he Horus names of dhe fist ree dynasties. A 
survey reveals subtle developments in the type of epithet chosen, and thus in the message 
conveyed, Changes in the formulation of the Horus name (a Setlename and a Horus-and 
‘Seh name are also atested from the late Second Dynasty) must reflect, to some degre, 
the changing emphasis of Egyptian kingship. 

The Horus names of several Fit Dynssty Kings express the aggressive authority of 
Horus, perhaps reflecting the coereive power of kingship st this carly stage of Egyplian 
suutehosd Names like "Honus the fighter (Aha), “Horus the strong (Dje?) oF cam-eaising 
Horus (Qa) cal to mind the warlike iconography of the earliest royal monuments fromm 
he period of state formation, They emphaskee an authority based upon niliary might and 
he power of life and death. Amongst First Dynasty Horus names, only Semerkhet 
‘companion of the eocportion', makes 4 theological stutemenl, expressing the 


ıselationship between Horus and the other principal deities in the Egyptian pantheon. In 
his respect, I potats the way to more sustained efforts st theological exposition in the 
Third Dynasty. 

The emphasis in the Second Dynasty is rather different, Following periods of 
instability, he fist and last kings of the dynasty were cach feed with a task of renewal, 
and this is reflected in heir Horus names: ‘Horus: the Iwo powers are at pence’ 
(Hietepsekhemıry) and “Horus and Seth: the Io powers have arisen; the two lonls are at 
pence in him” (Khasekhemwy-ebuy-betepimel) The other Second Dynasty Honus 
ames expcess the deal of Kingship in more overly theological terms: hence names sucht 
ıa “Honus, lord of the sun" (Nebra), ‘Hons of divine nature" (Niner), and especially 
"Horus strong-willed, champion of Maar” (Sekthemibperenmant). This last name is the 
scariest and most direct expression of he King's peincipal ole: 1o uphold Mant 

‘This end continues into the Third Dynasty when the Horus names describe either the 
relationship between Horus and the other gods comprising ‘he corporation" or the 
postion of Horus as the god most intimately associated with Egypînn Kingship, Thus, 
horus is both the ‘(most divine of the corporation’ (Netjenkhet) and the (most) 
powerful of the corportion’ (Sekhenmkhel), and has “arisen as a ho" [Khab). The king, 
J ihe incamurion of Hocus, is ‘the strong protector” (Sanakh) of mankind and the 
cosmos, and ‘high of the white crown” (Qahedjel), the most exalted item in the royal 
regalia. The Horus names of the Third Dynasty ings comprise a miniature theological 
wentîse on Horus, he king, Their relationship to each other and to he wider pantheon. n 
his respect they echo he complex theology of the Pyramid Texts, some of which must 
dale back to the Early Drastic period. 


Te "Teo Ladies’ rile 


The tile nb, the To Ladies” (Figure 6.5), emphasised the geographical duulity of he 
Egyptian realm, but at the same time the enduring unification of the Tro Lands in the 
person of the King, A similar concept is expressed in a cireulocution for the king found 
i one ofthe tiles bome by Early Dynastic queens, ‘she who sees Horusrant-Seth'- The 
concept hat the King embodied both gods highlights a fundamental role of kingship: the 
reconciliation of opposites in order to maintain the established ocder. The hy name 
emphasised the geographical aspeet of this balance. 

‘The by mame itself was written after the images of he two deities, he vulture and 
cobra, In one instance, on a label of Djet fron tnıstaba S3504 at North Saqqan, he cobra 
is replaced by the fed crown, demoastraling a very early association of the Io (Gardiner 
1958), Each godless is depicted resting on a basket (19; he two baskets form a pun oa 
ıe ille sel (nh) (S.Schot 1956-56. The choice of Neklibet and Wadjet to symbolise 
he two halves of the county seems to dale back lo the immediate afermath of the 
ıunilîenıion. Elkab and Bute also represented the very different lerains of the Two Lands: 
he narov river valley of Upper Egypt, running through barren desert on either side; and 
ihe wide expanses of flat, marshy land in the Delta. had long been suspected that the 
towns themsehes must have been important localities in the period immediately 
preeeding the unification, Modem exenvalions have confirmed that this was indeed the 
Case (von der Way 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1991, 1992; Hendriekx 1994). 


Barly drastic taye 174 


“The concept of the “Two Ladies’ is first met in the reign of Aba. An ebony label from 
he tomb of Neith-hotep (probably Abu's mother) st Naqada shows the serek of Aba 
acing a tentlike shrine, enclosing the signs nhy mn. There has been considerble debate 
abou the meaning of this group. may be the name of a King: more plausibly, it nay be 
he name of the shrine ise, ‘the Two Ladies endure? (Quirke 1900:23). n this case, the 
label anes he existence of the Two Ladies’, and their close connection wih the 
kingship, Rom the very begianing of the First Dynasty; but it does not prove the 
existence of the Two Ladies tile at this stage, nor does it have any bering o1 
ideitîcation of he sermi-legendary King Menes, 

The element nh first appears as a regular element of the royal tinulary in the reign of 
Semerkhet (the clement nw in Anedjib's tiralary may be seen as a precursor [S Schott 
1956:60]. Many ofthe Early Dynastic 


Figure 6.5 The Two Ladies. (1) The pairing ofthe 
vulture goddess Nekhbet and the cobra 
goddess Wadjct (known in Egyptian as 


mbi», ‘the Toro Ladies’) is first attested 
(top) onan ivory label of Aha rom the 
royal tomb at Naqada (afier Emery 
1961:50, fig. 10). (2) The pairing of the 
two goddesses was adopted in the First 
Dynasty as one of the king's principal 
titles, as shown here on an ivory year label 
of Qin from Abydos (after Petrie 1900: pl 
XVIL29). Not to same scale. 


kings wrote the tiles swr-hiy and nbny together, followed by a single name which thus 
sewed under both healings An alternative interpretation sees the AP, element as part Of 
he ent-hily name, only later becoming a separate tile in its own right (Mûler 1938:51: 
S.Sehone 1956; Quiike 199023) 

Early Dynastic inseriptions record oly a few distinctive nh names; that is, those 
whieh differ fom the King's aswrAIY name. A nh name. s#, is atestel on a ew 
inscriptions from he reign of Qan. This may have fhe meaning ‘brother’, expressing the 
king's closeness to the patron goddesses, A recently discovered year label of Qua fom 
his tomb at Abydos gives an otherwise unatlested version of the King's by name, Mp. 
who) ‘the ane who pacifies (the Two Ladies (Dreyer et al 1996-74, pl 14e) Ths 
seems 1o express the role of the king in placating the gods and in maintaining the 
harmony of opposites necessary for cosmic order. The Horus Sekhemkhet imieted his 
illustrious predecessor Netjerikhet in many ways, not least in The choice of his aby name: 
wan Vory plaque, found in one of the subterranean magazines of Sekhemklnet's unfinished 
ep pyramid, is ascribed nbty artic nh J. The mame arif. nh ) is diltieult 1o 
translate precisely, but it is clearly coanected with the word ır and probably refers to 
he sacred nature of Kingship. The word 4r had added significance in Egyptian, 
conveying a sense of separateness This sense that the King is set apat fron he rest of 
humanity was expressed in coerce terms in the location and arehieeture of the Third 
Dynasty step pyramid complexes. 


Tle nswr-blty ile 


The urwt-hib title was an innovation of Den's reign, one of several important 
developments which charseteeise the middle of the First Dynasty. has been suggested 
ha the adoption of the new ttle coineided with the first occurrence of the joint ceremony 
Of newi ‘the appearance of the dual king, recorded on he Palermo Stone in 
he reign of Den (year x+3) (Godron 1990:180), The new tile took second place in the 
royal teulary, coming mmmediately afer the king's Hors name. Whereas he Horus name 
femained the principal means of identifying the reigning king, the newr-biy title and 
hame offen seem to have been used in secondary contexts (Quirke 1990:23). For 
example, inscriptions referring 1o buildings or boats named after he King use the ow: 
ly (or newr-hiy-aho name. 

“The name itself followed the title nswr-hin: translated Iiterally as ‘he of the sedge and 
bee. The meaning of the tile is complex and many-faceted In bilingual inscriptions of 


Bary dynastic iaymt 176 


he Piolemaic period, he Cîreek equivalent of nsıul-hiy translates as ‘king of Upper and 
Lower Egypt’. This has remained the traditional translation foc mw-hiy, even though it 
is unlikely to have been the original sense. Rather, the recently suggested ‘dual king’ 
gives a beter approximation of the irse meaning (Quirke 1990:11). The tle seems 1o 
have siressed the role of the king as the embodiment of all the dualities which made up 
Faypt sad the cosmos according to he Egyptians’ world-view. Above all, perhaps, the 
dual ttle aswbily stressed the wo different aspects of kingship, the divine and he 
human, The usual word for ‘king in ancient Egyplian as uert and this appears to have 
een The superior designation for ihe ruler {alhough it may simply have been an 
sabbreviatioa of the full ûtle newrbay [Quirke 1990-111) In other contexts, especially 
administrative, the king might be referred to indirectly as bi: For example, the positioa 
Of ‘king's teasurer' was designated by the ille A mv-his: aot *% amant The nowt: 
Bi title ‘probably fused two hierarchically ordered words for king and aspects of 
kingship’ (Baines 1995.127). seems likely that nwt as the superior tle, conveyed the 
divinity of the King, expressed in his role as the ineımation of Hous and earthly 
repeeseatutive of the gods. (It is significant that the Egyptian word for “kingship” is 
derived from newt) By contrast, hy may have indicated he King's human aspect 
especially his position as head of sate and government (Ray 1903:70; Shaw and 
Nicholson 1905-153), The introduction of the xrwl-hity ttle mmarks an important stage in 
the focmulation of kingship ideology. Henceforth, emphusis sras firmly placed upon the 
king's role ia binding together Egypt and the cosmos. Harmony of opposites is a theme 
whieh was given visual expression in some of fhe earliest monuments of kingship, 
particularly the ceremonial paletes from the laie Predynastic period. With he 
eoduclion of the anwf-hily tle in the reign of Den, this heme was brought into the 
toya tula 


aewe-bin names 


Afr the title neufhîy camê a name which may also have been the King's birth name 
(SSeho 1956.76). I was certaialy the name by which many kings were known in laler 

vals and King lists, The mıwF-Biy tile was often paired with the element nbn, afler the 
iroductioa of the latter is the reign of Semerkaet. Perlosen was he fist king to separate 
he two elements and use the aswr-bîy title alone once more (S.Sehot 1956:61, on a 
sealing Irom Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. XKIL190) 

Den's mswr-hiy name, smi (S Sebort 1956:60), appears on many eatemporary 
‘inseriptioas, especially the stone vessels found beneath the Step Pyrannid The nane was 
ıalso used on royal seals, tequently without reference to the king's Horus name, Jt must, 
therefore, have had a significance of ts own. H means ‘the two deserts’, referring to he 
casters aad western deserts which guerded the Nile valley on each side. J reinforces the 
message OF the ant-Biy tile: hat the king's rule extends over the whole of Egypt, east 
and west as well as north and south. Given the evidence that Den probably conducted « 
military campaign against the nomadic tibespeople of tbe astera desert, his swt-hiy 
name may have had added resonance, proclaiming his ietention to subdue Egypt's desert 
borderlands and bring them under his yoke, An alternative sending of the name is 1 
ıranslated as ‘the foreigner” or ‘Ihe Sinaiic’ (Godron 1990.21). IF has been suggested that 


Den adopted this secondary name following a military suceest against the inhabitants of 
he Sina, recorded oa he Nocy label fron Abydos (Godron 1990-180). 

The aw-hienby name of Den's successor, the Horus Anedjîb, i curious and quite 
impenetrable: nur-pxhi3. Foc many years, the arwt-higwnhny name of Semekhet likewise 
defied interpretation; but it has nov been shown 1o read iri r. ‘guardian of the god 
he bly element s interpreted as forming par of the nane, rather than another tile, then 
he name should read irı-nbty, “guardian of the Two Ladies’ (Quirke 1990-23). The name 
expresses the close relationship beween the King and the divine sphere. It also conveys 
something of the tension inherent in the ideology of divine kingship: the king is separıte 
Tom ihe rest of humanity, the interlocutor beween people and gels, inde the gods’ 
repeeseatative on earth; but he is still not quite one of the gods, possessing only “inte 
divinity (Quirke 1990:11). Kis he soyal Aa, Ihe divine essence ieamate in the King, 
which passes unchanged fiom generation to generation; the king himself cuanot escape 
death. Finally, the ALBANY mame of Hetepsehemwy (up) is merely an 
abbreviation of his Horus name. 


The gol slg and ring of ete) 


Perhaps the most difficult ite to imtepect satisfactorily is the one which first appears in 
he Old Kingdon but which clearly has antecedents in the Early Dynastic period This is 
he ‘Golden Horus’ ite (ef. S.Sehott 1956,6873), writen with 1 figure of the god Honus 
ısurmounting the hieroglyph for gold" (abu). The tile seems to have expressed he 
divinity of he king since, secording to Egyptian mythology, the gods’ bodies were made 
of gold. The immunity Of this metal Rod tarnishing, combined with las obvious soli 
connotations, sras no doubt the underlying reason for this associatioa (Quirke 1990:11 
“To the Egyptian mind, vith ts propensity for seeking multiple and iatertwined meanings, 
he ‘Golden Horus’ fitle may have had a further significance, The ancient name of 
Naqada, he cult ceaire of dhe god Seth, was Nubt, meaning ‘golden (city); Seth himself 
was oflen described as nbn the one of Nubt” or ‘ihe golden oe’. The image of he 
Horus falcon surmounting the sign for gold may have had the added symbolism of Horus 
conquering Seth. The tile may therefore have expressed the role of he King as champion 
OF Maat and defender of he cosmic onder against he forces of chaos, 

A fmgmentary inseriptioa fom the tomb of Den at Abydos shows the King's serelh 
juxtaposed wilh a vertical group f three signs: a ebra, the gold sign and a ring (Spencer 
1903:87, îa. 66). A similar combination of the gold sign and ring occurs in the tinulary of 
Nejerikhet (Lauer 1939: pl. XVLL-2; S.Schor 1956:63). A stone vessel fragment of 
Khasekhemwy ftom Abydos shows the group abv! 1 s in place of the customary buy 
hp ii=f. The group may, perhaps, be interpreted as the King's ‘gold name". On he 
Palermo Stone and its associated fragments, it appears that û caiouche and a phrase 
incorporating the gold sign segularly formed part f the royal tinulary, coming between 
he Horus name of the King and the name of his mother (S Scho 1956-71). The entries 
for Dien, Sermeihet and Nineter all show this feature. N may be that the name i the 
cartouche, at this period and in the reign of Snefens, is in fact the ‘gold name’ (S. Schott 
19561). 

The ring (tn) symbolises eternity, and was later elongated 1o form the cartouche that 
ıenelosed he kings binl name (Midler: Winkler 1984). It seen to stress the permanence 


ary drastic Haye 78 


of Egyptian kingship, the immutability of an institution which was characterised as part 
Of a divinely ordained cosmic order, The earliest cartouche occurs on 4 fragmentary 
sealing of the Horus Sanakht from Beit Khallaf (Garstang 1902: pl. XIX 7: Seidlmayer 
TS96b: pl. 23). Sanakht sras probably the penultimate king of the Third Dynasty, and he 
inmoductioa of the cafouche as a frame enclosing a royal name may have been an 
innovation of his rega, Although in carlier times the ring seems to have been associated 
wilh the King's ‘gold name’, oa the sealing of Sanaklt it is likely that the elongated 
singin other words the cariouche encloses the King's aswi-bily name. Certainly, 

he examples of a cartouche from the following reign contain the king's nnvt-hiy nae, 
‘Indeed, this element of the royal titulary seems to have come to proeuihence st the end of 
he Third Dynasty. 


ROYAL RITUALS AND FESTIVALS: CELEBRATIONS OF 
KINGSHIP 


One of the most enduring ways of reinforcing rule——from the earliest states to the moder 
world—is through carefully stagetmanaged ceremonies. The ruler is presented to his 
people, oc a select group Of them, in a setting which emphasises his authority, both 
political and supematural, This is particularly true of ancient Egypl, where ‘kingship is 
wal” (Baines 1995-130) The celebratioa of periodic festivals not aly gave a sense of 
order and routine to the ritual life of the country, it also guaranteed the institution of 
Kingship regular exposure ia a eour-eoatrolled seting. 

Ezypt's Early Dynastic nilees instituted a number of rituals and festivals designed 10 
promote the position of the king and of kingship at the very centre of Egyptian society. 
The iconography of the Narmer macehead suggests thar many aspects of royal iuual and 
ideology had already been established by the beginning of he First Dynasty. Others may 
have been ianovatlons of later reis. All were assimilated into a body of tradition which 
was presented as etemal and unchanging, The various celebrations tock place throughout 
ıa king's reign, beginning at his accession and coronation. Regular ritual appearances 
feinfoceed his divine starus, hilt the legitimacy and efîcsey of his nile were renewed 
later in his reiga during the complex Sed-festival. 


The accexslan and coronatlon 


The death of a king was a time of great cosmic danger, since the forces of disorder (oot 
ısupematural aad human) might take advantage of the anston to disrupt he established 
order. Whilst in the Middle and New Kingdoms the institution of co-regeney ensured a 
smooth succession and reduced the poteatial for dynastic iawigue, no such mechanism 
seems lo have existed in earlier periods. Cerainly, there are hints from the Fourth 
Dynasty that the succession was nt always trouble five. The existence of several royal 
princes, each with his own powerful position in the administration, must have presented 
‘eat opportunities for politcal manoeuvring. As one might expect, he evidence for such 
events is very limited. None the less, there are intimatioas of struggle surounding he 
succession at certain points in the Early Dynastic period. An ephemeral nuler, perhaps a 
super, called Snefecka is attested at the end of the First Dynasty; the sequence of Kings 


in the middle of the Second Dynasty is still aot firmly established, and there may have 
been 1 coatest for power between wo soyal factions. 

1° Egypt was vulnerable to politieal upheaval at he death of a king, the supernatural 
dangers were equally great. Since ihe King was ihe defender of created order and he 
conqueror of the forces of chaos, his desi represented the temporary victory of hose 
same malign powers. Without its champion, Egypt wis in mortal danger from 
supematural forces of evil, Hence, he accession of a new king was accompanied by a 
‘Series of inal, designed 1o restore Manî and to ceassert Egyp's place at he centre of he 
cosmos. The ceremonies surrounding a change of reiga may be divided into hwo quite 
separate events: The secession and the coronation. 

"According to ter sources, fhe proclamation of a sew King—in other words, his 
accession 10 the throne took place at the Heologieally propitious moment Of sunrise. 
The dawa of a new day, marking the defeat of darkness by the focezs of light, and the 
rebirth of creation, was an appropriate metaphor for the beginning of a new reign, with its 
parallel eoanotatioas (Frankfort 1948:148). Indeed, the same verb (A _ 1) was used by he 
Egyptians to denote both the rising of the sun and the public appearance of the king. We 
have no direct evidence of secession rials, but we may assume that they were 
characterised by great solemnity. 

By coatrasl, there is limited evidence foc the various ceremonies which marked the 
coronation of he King. Only after he had coqapleted the necessary riual acts, o & 
favourable day in the calendar, was the king possessed of all his powers, and was Ezypt 
once again under the guidance of a divine authority. 1t is likely that the coronation 
ceremonies were scheduled for one of the days in the year which snaked new beginnings 
(Frankfort 948:104): the first day of the season of winter, when the Nile Hoodwraters 
began 1o recede; the surmmer and winter soltices; the spring and autumn equinoxes; oF 
New Year's Day iself. ln he Early Dynastic period ihe coronation seems 1o have 
consisted of two distinet ceremonies, cach of which embodied one of the roles of 
Kiagship. Recorded on he Palermo Stone at the begining of each new reign, these 
ceremonies were the ritual reunification of he Two Lands and the circuit of the wal at 
Memphis 


Uniting Upper and Lower Eaypt 


The precise rituals which characterised the evet are not attested. Indeed, ‘uniting Upper 
arid Lower Egypt may represent nothing moce than a formal statement of the pinay 
ole of he king: the binding force at he centre of Egyptian society. (One interpretation Of 
he Narmer Palete is that it sepresents his ceremony [Millet 1990-59] 


The cireult of the wall 


The second component of the coronation ceremony involved the king performing a 
cireuit of the wall at Memphis. According to tradition, Memphis inh 4 , ‘the white 
wall’ in Egyptian had been founded by Menes as his new capital. The city; which was 
ihe principal sest of govemment, stood 31 the junction of Upper and Lower Egypt, and 
therefore signihed the King's dominion over the Two Lands. By striding or running 
around the perimeter of the royal capital he new king asserted His territorial authority 


Barly drastic Haymt 130 


and took syııholic possession of his sealm and its royal administration, ln its emphasis on 
he territorial aspect of the king's authority, he ‘cireit of the wall was thus akin to one 
ofthe main rituals ofthe Sod-festival (see below). 


Tle appearance of the king 


A ceremony which took place at the coronation of at least one Early Dynastic king 
(probably Netjerikhet) was he ritual ‘appearance of the dual king {© nswr-bin. 1a 
contrast to the “unification of the Two Lands’ and the ‘eiseuit of the wall the rial 
appearance of the King was not restuicted to his coronation, bur took place at other times 
during a reign. The appearance of the king apparently iook one of three forms: the t1 
aw. ‘appearance of the king as asw?', the ® {Bin ‘appearance of he King as BIY, oF 
he combined version # 7 ntwrbîy, ‘appearance of the dual king (newb). We 
cannot be sure of the ideological difference between these three types of royal 
appearance. Probably the aspect of kingship being emphasised dictated the name and 
folmm of the ceremony, although a geographieal distincton cannot be excluded entieely, 
since one of the characteristics of Egyptian thought ras to find multiple meanings in 4 
Single word or concept Given the hint of intemal unrest during the middle of Ninetjer's 
tein, in particular the apparent ataek on two (Lower Egyptian?) localities in year 13, he 
King's subsequent three appearınces 1s ily may have been istended to deliver a poliical 
message about the exlent of his authority 

The ritual appearance of the King would have involved hin appearing in public in a 
carefilly managed sening, For the h1 biy the King would appear in the ral crow, for 
he HF nowt he would wear the white croum, and for the conibined ceremony the 
double crown sould be worm. I is significant in {his respect that the earliest occurrence 
ofthe Fanm-Bily is an entry on the Palermo Stone which probably falls during the 

sign of Den. As we have seen, the double erown may have been an innovation of Den's 
sign, and the combined siuwal appearance of fhe king rmay have been instituted at the 
same time. However, the earlier, separale cesemenies were not abandoned altogether: 
ıine years after his appearance a dual king, Den celebrated a ritual appearance as biy 
‘This entry on the Palermo Stone is the earliest anestation of the #1 Ni ceremony; the 
Facute Gist recorded somewhat earlier. on the preceding register of he Palermo 
‘Sane whieh may correspond to the reign of Djer. 

‘The ‘appearance of the King as anv is attested oly twice on he annals of the 
Palermo Stone, In both cases, he ceremony seems 1o have taken place in the king's 
seventh fegnal yet. This may be 4 colacidence, or it may be significant It is possible 
hat the A Frist occurred mainly in the eaely part of a reign. Unfortunately, so ile is 
known about the ceremony ihat 1t is impossible to gauge its tre importance to he 
institution of kingship. The ‘appenrance of the king as biy" was celebcated more 
frequently during the Early Dynastic period. is possible Hhar the ceremony depicted on 
he Kamer macehend is the h 7 hy (Millet 1990:56). This ritual is attested once 
during he reign Of Den, and no less than four times under Ninctjer. Aer The latter King's 
îfeenth year oa the throne, he seems to have celebrated the h_ {1 biy every other year. 
“The combined ceremony, instituted in the reign of Den, seems to have replaced the two 
ısepurate ceremonies towards the end of the Second Dynusty. Thus, the lowest register of 
he Palermo Sioae, probably corresponding 1o the cary part of the Third Dynasty, records 


only ‘appearances of the dual king'. One king, possibly Nejerikhet or his immediate 
'successa, celebrated this event three times in his fist four years on the throne. The first 
occurrence, in the king's first regnal year, nay represent the actual coronation ceremony: 
he repetitions of the ritual in successive years were perhaps intended 1o butiress the 
power of he new ruler aller his predecessor's death, lt is possible that the change of 
nasty following the death of Khasekhemey necessitated 4 greater ftequency of royal 
ıimal fhan usual in the eacly yeaes of the new reign, to legitimise the king in the eyes of 
his people and the gods. 1 is often dificult to identify precisely he royal rinuals depicted 
in Early Dynastic iuserîptions The rial appearances of the King were probably 
connected with the Sel-festival. J is noteworthy that the Sedafestival reliefs in the Sus 
Temple of Niuserra show the distinctive double pavilion associated with the Se-festival 
bul also the single pavilions foc sites specifically associated either with Upper EYP OF 
with Lower Egypt (Millet 1990:57) 


The Sedfesthal 


Undoubtedly the pre-eminent festival of divine kingship was the Sedfestival (Homung 
wand Stachel 1974). Despite its great antiquity and long survival _its origins reach back 
ino the Predynastie period and it was sûll celebeuted by the Polemnaic kings_there is 
surprisingly Linie explicit evidence foc the details of the Sed-testival: where, whea and 
how often it was celebrated, the precise onder of events and heie symbolic significance. 
Even the origin of the name is unclear (cf. K Marin 184:782; Gohary 1992-1-2). The 
“Step Pyramid complex of Netjerkhet isthe most infocmative contemporary source for he 
fom aad stueufe of the Seddfesival in the Early Dynastic perio, The various 
components of the Sed-festival court provided he King with ll the necessary spaces and 
buildings for the etemmal celebration of the festival. 

Many of he supposed represeatations of the Sed-festival often quoted fo the first 
three dynasties in fact show other royal ceremonies or even soyal statues, None the less, 
Jat least to Early Dynastic kings, Den and Qua, are known to have celebrated a Sed 
festival, whilst another, Anedjib, may have done s0 (Hornung and Stuchelin 1974:86). An 
ivory statuette of an anonymous First Dynasty King fron Abydos shows the ruler wearing 
he ûgh-fitiag Sedesival robe. Stone vessel fragments Hom beneath he Step 
Pyrammidwhich may date to the Second Dynasty, perhaps the reign of Ninetier (Melek 
1979)seem to meation a Sed-festival. Neterikhel i sometimes said 10 have celebrated 
ıa Setkfesival ia his lifetime (FD. Fricdanan 1995:8, quoting Strudwiek 1985:4), but there 
are no contemporary iaseriptioas to support this. An ebony label of Den from Abydos 
(Perie 1900: pls X114, XV.16) is usually cited as an early depiction of the Sed-festival 
However, alilhough many of the atwibutes of the Sed-festival such as the tighE-Iining 
sobe and the king's nun between territorlal markers are shown, the absence of the 
rone-dais with double staircase, an essential element of he Sed-festival, muy be 
decisive. Rather than showing the Sedfesival, the label may depict the ceremony of 
FF tute (Millet 1990-56; F.D. Friedman 1995-7-8). The throne dais with twin 
staircases i shown on another, fragmentary label of Den fromm Abydos (Petrie 1900: pl 
XIV L2, since his reign is known 1o have been a long one, it is almost certain that Den 
celebrated a Sed-festival, At the end of the First Dynasty, (Jaa also enjoyed a long reign 
and apparently celebrated two Sed-festivals: a f#agment of a silstone bowl from beneath 


Barly drastic taye 182 


he Step Pyramid meations the king's second Sed-festival (aca and Lauer 1959:12, pl 
Sno.) 

‘1n later tradition the Sed-festival was celebrated in the king's thirtieth regnal year. For 
example, on the Rasetu Stone the Egyptian expression Mons ‘Seddlestival,. is rendered 
in Greek as trlatontaeteris ‘thirty-yeae festival” (Godron 190:183). However there are 
definite exceptions 10 ihis rule fiom the Dynastic period (Homung and Stsehelin 
'1974:54-6). Some kings who are know to have reigned for mote than thirty years never, 
apparently, celebrated a Sel-festival (for example, Senusret ID, whilst others (r 
example, Akhenaten) dil so well before their thirtieth segnal year (Gohary 1992). The 

casos which lay behind each decisioa to celebenue he Sal-festival semmuin obscure, but 
ûi is unlikely that a mere counting of years was the decisive actor (Frankfort 1948:79), 
The eelebruton may have depended entirely upon the health of the tegning king (Godron 
1990.184), Selfestivals celebrated before ihe hirtieth regnal year representing the 
actions of elderly or ohenwise infirm kings (Gokury 19924). 

‘The Egyptian expression M-s4 has oflen been translated as ‘jubilee’. As we have seen, 
his may be inappropriate give the evidence for ts somewhat regular celebration, al 
least in the early periods of Egyptian history. The significance of he Sel-festival clearly 
went much dseper than a simple celebrution of the King's longevity. ln essence, t was & 
wrilwal of rejuvenation (Barta 1975; Gohary 1992:1), by which he powers of the reigning 
King, both magical aad physical, as well as his relationship with the gods and his people, 
were renewed (Frankfort 1948:79; K Marin 1984:83). The surviving evidence for the 
Sedfesival fiom the Early Dynastic period indicates 3 complex series of inwals whose 
symbolism goes 1o the very heart of kingship ideology. The Sed-fesival court oa he 
eastern side of the Step Pyramid complex preserves a series of shrines, builk in stone but 
modelled on timber and mating consiruetons. These temporary structures seet 10 have 
een erecled a the sile of the Sed-festival to house the lauges of provincial deities 
(Frankfort 1948:80) The deities of Upper Egypt assembled on one side of the court, 
housed in shrines of the quintessential Upper Egyptian ype (ron. The deities of Lower 
Egypt galhered on the opposite side of the court, housed in the curvelopped shrines 
churacterisic of Lower Egypt (or pr mw). The various gods and goddesses fon 
imparant snes throughout Egypt seen 1o have gathered 1ogether to pay homage to the 
king and to legitimise his auhoriy over the whole of Egy. For his part, the King 
probably seciprocated, paying his own homage to hese deities, renewing he bond 
rween the kingship and the divine sphere whieh guranteed Egypt's continuing 
prosperity. 

"Anolher part of the festival emphasised the King's secular hold on power: the ritual of 
ıerîtorial claim, kaown as ‘encompassing the field’. Syrnbolically, iv fulalled much the 
same function as the cirwuit of the wall st Memphis, carried out by the king st his 
coronatioa (Decker 1992:4). 1n the great court which stretches before Nejeeikhet's Step 
Pyramid, and again in the smaller court in fiont of the “House of the Sou’, Iwo sets of 
horseshoeshaped markers o¢ ‘cairns delimit a ritual ‘field’. At Saqqara these markers 
are arranged in pairs on other Early Dynastic representations, such as the Narmer 
mscehead and the ebony label of Den, they appear in sets of three. Oriented oa a north 
South axis they clearly symbolise the 1eritolal limits of he King's realm, the "Geld 
between hem representing the whole of Egypt (Spencer 1978:53). Clad ia the tight 
firing Sed-festival sobe, wearing the red, white or double crow, and carying a fal in 


one hand and a baton-like object in the other, he King ran or strode between the tw sels 
of markers, reasserting his claim to the land of Egypt We know frorm Iter references that 
he baton.like object is he mis” a cootainer which held he initrpr (FD Friedman 
905:24), This seems to represent a title dee, expressing the King's legal possession of 
he territory of Egypt. ln origin, the Sed-festival run nay also have served to prove he 
king's continuing physical poteney (Decker 1902-3. 

The act of ‘encompassing the eld" has been interpreted as the central ceremony of the 
sesire festival, since It re-dedieuted ‘the eld (representing Egyp0) to the gods and 
renewed the legitimacy of the king's rule (Frankfurt 1948:86 However, representations 
of ihe Sed-festlval, in particular the hieroglyph used to symbolise the even, indicate that 
another part of the proceedings siood st the symbolic and ritual heart of the celebration. 
This was the dual enthronement of the king, oace as king of Lower Egypt and once a5 
king of Upper EYP, in the distinctive Sed-festival pavilion (K-Manin 1984-782). e is 
ıfhis pavilion with twin staircases which forms the hieroglyph for Als The base of just 
such a pavilion has been preserved ia the Sed-festival court of the Step Pyramid complex 
(Plate 6.1). The king would appear twice on the dais, once in the red crown and once in 
ihe white crown. For both enthronemenis fhe king wore the long, close-fîning Sed 
festival sobe. The symbolism of the ritual is unambigugus: it recalled the coronation 
ceremony and proclaimed the duality of kingship. 


In later depictions of the festival (for example, Kaiser 1971), a special building erected 
near the pavilion served as a roblagzoom, where the king could change his regalia 
(Frankfort 1948-83) The Step Pyramid complex, suggests thar a number of diferent 
buildings were needed during the course of the festival. All were probably light srucwures 
of reeds, mating and wooden polen, forming a temporary encampment for the duration of 
the cerermonjes. ln addition 1o, or adjoining, he robing-toom, was a festival palace, which 
provided temporury accommodation for the King. The Step Pyramid complex also 
comprises two further ceremonial buildings, dubbel the ‘House of the Noh’ and the 
"House of the South. They may represent the buildings in which the king held audiences 
or received the homage of visiting dignitaries, in his dual capacity as king of Lower 
Fzypt and king of Upper Egypt, respectively. is likely that member of the royal family 
wand the highest officals of he administration attended the Sed-fesival: to refî their 
Bonds of loyalty 10 the king, t0 etlebcale the juvenation of his divîne and seeulı 
authority, and to wimess {he renewal of his contret with Egypt and the gods. The 
architceture of the Step Pyramid complex emphasises the importance of the Sel festival 
to Early Dynastic kingship. e also demonseues that the festival had become firmly 
established as an integral part of royal Heology at an early period of Egyptian histocy 
(K Martin 1984:84). The Sed-festival is crucial foc our understanding of easly kingship, 
he component rials illustrating the key features of kingship ideology (Fenkfoct 
1948:29) 


Early drastic Heyret 


ıte 6.1 The emblem ofthe Sed-festival. A throne 
platform with two staircases, situated at 
the southern end of the smaller courtyard 
which lies on the eastem side of the Step 
Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet at 
Saqqara (author's photograph). A platform 
ofthis kind featured during the ceremonial 
of the Sed-festival and was used as the 
hieroglyph for the festival itself. 


Orher rivals 


"At least three other royal ceremonies are recoded on monuments of the Early Dynastic 
period, including two fon the very dawn of Egyplian history 


Opening the canal 


The Scocpion macthead, dating from the end of the Predymastic period, shows the king 
wil a hoe in one hand apparently performing a ritual connected with ligation, As the 
conduit for divîne beneficence towards the land of Egypt, the king was respoasible or 

e continued fenilivy of the land and for the suceess of the annual inundation. The 
ereation and maintenance of irigation were of crucial importance 10 Egypt's agricultural 
productivity. An early First Dyasty slate dish in the Metropolitan Museum of An, New 
York. bears an inscription whieh may also relate 1 an imigatioa ritual: the opening OF 
she lake “the striding of the gods" tn Memphis (Hofman ISO313). 


Hunting the hippopotamus 


It has been suggested (Millet 1990:58) that the Scorpion macehend originally portrayed a 
second ceremoay, the harpooning of a hippopotamus (Figure 6.6) This is not depicted 
directly oa the surviving portions of the macehead, but may be hinted at by other 
clement of he decorative scheme, notably the marshland environment and the group of 
female "dancers la ihe mythical version of the hippopotamus hunt described on the 
walls of the Ed temple, the ritval involves a similar chorus of female musicians. The 
conjunetion of these ws sinus opening the canal and spearing the hippopotamus 
cceurs in regal year x+ of Den on the Palermo Stone. This recorded instance of s11 
FF 3%, ‘spearing he hippopotamus, has been linked with» sealimpressioa of Den 
showing The king wrestling with a hippopotamus (Petrie 1901: pl. VILS-6). Alternatively, 
he uo actions, speariag and wrestling, may be uncoanectel and may represent two 
ıdisninet finals. A more plausible link may be made berween the entry oa the Palermo 
Stone and a fragmentary wooden label ftom Dean's tomb at Abydos. This shows a male 
gure, pethaps the king, thrusting a Iwocpronged spear into a rounded object which may 
sepeeseat a pool (Petrie 1901: pl. VILI1) In later times, the ritual spearing of « 
hippopotamus was imbued wilh powerfal ideological coanotalioas. 

The earliest depictions of suwal hippopotamus hunt are to be found oa a decorated 
pottery bowl dated to Kaqada 1 froan the cemetery st Mahasna (Ayroa and Loat 1911: pl 
KXVIL13), an unproveaanced, incised, silstone palette of siwilar date (Acselberghs 
1961: pl. XLVI), and a fragment of he painted cloth from a Naqada Il grave at Gebelein. 
Al three examples show a hippopotamus being harpooned. Although there is 
considerable uncenainty about tbe details of the sinual, ere is litle doubt about its 
symbolic significance. The wild hippopotamus is a fierce creature, and must have posed & 
reat to fishermen and all hose travelling the Nile by bout in early times. Jt was thus cast 
asan embodiment 


> ا 


3 


Figure 6.6 Hunting the hippopotamus. Evidence for 
lan obscure royal çitual: (1) a fragment of 
painted linen from a late Predynastie tomb 
at Gebelein (now in the Egyptian 
Museum, Turin) showing a male figure 
harpooning a hippopotamus; this scene 
occurs in the context of other ritual 


Early drastic Heyret 136 


activities (afer Galassi 1955:10, fig. 5); 
(2) seal-impression of Den from Abydos 
showing (a statue of?) the king spearing a 
hippopotamus (after Kaplony 1963, 111 
fie, 364; (3) an entry from the third 
register of the Palermo Stone, referring to 
ıa year in the reign of Den as ‘the year of 
opening the lake “Thrones of the Gods" 
and hunting the hippopotamus’ (after 
Sehifer 1902: pl. I} Not to same scale. 


of the forces of disonlet, and in later times associated with the god Seth. The rial 
pearing of a hippopotamus, s common theme in the decoration of Old Kingdom private 
bs, repcesentsd an attack on chaos and struck a blow for the preservation of crete 
order. The ritual doubtless emphasised the paramunt sole of he king to uphold Mast. 


The presentation of tribute 


Another commemortive macehead, ftom the reign of Narmer, hus already been 
mentioned in connection with the “appearance of fhe King as hy". The scenes on the 
macehead also depict another ceremony, namely the reception of tribute. Whether this 
Ceeurred on a regular basis, or oly afer a military campaign, cannot be established. The 
Narmer macchead shows three bound captives being presented 1o the King. Three 
captives may represent a simple plurality, since the caption below states, ‘captives: 
120.000". The captives appear berween the two sets of teritorial markers previously 
encountered in depictions of the Sed-festival. These probably indicate that the ceremony 
took place in the eourt of royal appearance, perhaps within the royal palace compound, ln 
addition to the captives, the body presented to the king comprises 400,000 etle and 
1422.000 sheep and goats. These figures are scarcely credible, and probably suppont 4 
sjmbolie rather than a Ira interpretation of the monument ss a whole. Be hat as it 
may, I is very likely thar the booty of military campaigns was presented to the king in a 
foetal ceremony, which may have resembled, in samme fespects Ihe scene on the Narmner 
macehend. 


SPHERES OF ROYAL AUTHORITY 


The royal monuments from the period of state focmationr—ihe late Predyaastic and Early 
Dynastic paletes and maceheads_are, without doubl, ‘crucial surees ¢ early kingship 
(Raines 1905.124). The scenes they carry express and defîne the role of the king visd-vls 
Egypt and the cosmos. 

The prinmary duty of the king was to be the arbiter beeen the gods and the people of 
FEaypt, Within this overarehing sole of kingship, there were none the less many other 
dulies to be performed by the ruler. Moreover, he exigencies of govemment_- 
maintaining paliical and economic cotrol over the newly unified country necessitated 


ıa whole range of royal activities, These were intended to ensure the continued loyalty of 
he populace, he continued prestige and appeal of the institution of kingship, and he 
smooth running ofthe central adminisration. As might be expected, the best ilieations 
Of such activities are to be Found, not on monuments, but in documents more closely 
associated with he apparatus of government 


The evilance: year labelî and royal annalt 


Important insights into early notions of kingship may be gained from a survey of he 
events considered worthy of record in the royal annals. The annals eluting to the Early 
Dynastic period fal into hwo groups. First, here are the year labels (Figure 6.7). Second, 
here are the royal annals, cocıpristng the Palcemo Sioge a its associated frgments. 


The events shown oa First Dynasty year labels ean be divided into three beoad categories, 
din order of frequency: religious ceremoaies, royal visits and scenes of military aeliviy: 
Uniquely, year labels of Qaa also recon the foundation of a religious building and he 
cellection of various timbers, doubtless as raw materials for the royal workshops (Dreyer 
103b: 10; Dreyer ef al 1936:74-5, pl. 14e} The last type of setivity highlights the 
administrative purpose of year label and it is perhaps n suprise, therefore, that the 
events depicted convey a father different impeession of early kingship fromm that given by 
he surviving monuments fron the period of stale formation. The ceremonial paletes and 
ımsceheads are characterised by scenes of aggression and conquest, presenting a picture 
of he coereive, military spec of royal power this is also emphasised in some of he 
Horus names Rom the early First Dynasty. By contrast, the year lal 

other yal activites, primarily the king's participation in important religious ceremoaies 
and soyal visits to important national shrines, As was mentioned in Chapter 3, in 
Connetion with the royal annals, the system of nating & particular year affer one or more 
significant royal events requires, on 3 purely peactical level, hat eseh year be so named at 
he beginning rather than the ead of ihe mmelve-month period: otherwise, it would have 
been impossible to label accurately commodities received and dispatched during the year 
The implications of this fact ae enormous: he events ‘recorded oa fhe year labels musi 
have been pre-planned or at least predictable. Seenes of apparent military conquest mnu 
herefore, fecofd an idealised vie of events rather than acual carpages. 

A greater range Of events is recorded on the Palermo Stone. Like the year labels, the 
annals inehude references 1o religious and royal festivals, royal visits and punitive actions 
against enemies, but other types of event are mentioned much more frequently. Although 
hey cannot be used as objecive sources for ancient Egyptian hisiory (eoatra Weill 1961 
Gedlron 1990), the annals do nevenneless coastitute a ich source of information about 


Barly drastic teyre Ist 


Figure 6.7 Year labels. Three First Dynasty labels, 
originally attached to commodities to 
record their contents and date: (1) wooden 
label of Djet from Saqqara (after Gardiner 
1958:38); (2) ivory label of Qaa fr 
Abydos (after Petrie 1901: pl. XIL.6:; (3) 
recently discovered label of Qaa from the 
king's tomb at Abydos (afer Dreyer er al. 
1996: pl. 14e). Notto same scale. 


event recorded makes a deliberate statement about the King's 


kingship, sinet eve! 
‘and respobsîbilie 


The actives recorded 


The events recorded on year labels and in the annals primarily reflect the concems of 
early kingship and the selfimage which the institution sought to project Within this 


overall framework, tree interwoven strands are discemible, representing three aspects of 
he king's role: his poskion st the head of he sdministratica, and the overriding concern 
of he stale for effective government, allowing total control of the evuntry 's economic 
resources; his divine stalus as The repvesenlatlve of the god, and his attendant duty lo 
uphold their culls; his role, both ideological and practical, as defender of Egypt from the 
frees of chaos, real or supernatural 


The following of Honus 


By far the most common event recorded for the reigns of Early Dynastic Kings on the 
Palermo Stone is the fers-Hr, ‘following of Honus. Fromm early in the First Dynasty, this 
ıactivily seems to have taken place i altemate year. Alhough there appears o have bee 
ıa temporary break in the tradition, perhaps during the middle of the Fist Dynasty, the 
fnsHir was still recoded as a regular event carly 1 the Third Dynasty. Despine a number 
of alternative ioterpretations (foe example, Kees 1927; Kaiser 160:132), he “following 
of Horus" is most likely to have been a jourmey undertaken by the King o his officials at 
regular intervals foc the purpose of tax collection: compare a decree of Pepi 1, in which 
اعا ی ر چ رد ہد موقر یدوا‎ 
ıtaxcollection exercise (Selhe 1903.214; von Beckerath 1980:52). 

Ti has been suggested that he biennial royal progress allowed the king to exerelse his 
judicial authoniy, perhaps deciding important legal cases, as well as pemiting the 
detailed assessment and collection of tax revenues. I may be signiicant that he 
hieroglyph for 4m, ‘following’, used in this context, represents an instrument closely 
associated wilh fhe godless Mallet, and which can be interpreted as an executioners 
equipment (voa Beckerath 1956:6). The King is likely to have been aceommpanied by 
e senior members of the court uring these royal progresses. Hence, the ‘following Of 
Horus would have presented to the Egypûan people Their government on a regular basis 
(on Beckerath 1956-7) The practice may be interpeeted as a key elemeat of he 
mechanisms of rule developed by Egypt's carly kings. Jt provided a regular forum in 
which the coanmon people (7% 1) could pay homage, both persoaal anıl fiscal, 1o the 
ruler and his circle (p £). Moreover, the biennial royal tour of inspection allowed the 
govemment 1o retain tight central cogtrol over the country's economic resources, ensured 
ihe regular payment of taxes 1o the royal weasury—t0 guarantee the coatinued 
funcGoning of the goverment apparatus _ and reinforced the psychological ties of 
loyalty felt by the Egyplian popalace towards he king. 


Royal visits 


Royal visits are commonly depicted on the surviving Fist Dynasty year labels, As befts 
ıa county where the primary artery of communieston has always bern he River Nil 
hese visits were made by boat Three year labels record joummeys undertaken by the king 
in the royal bark. Two of these, in ihe reigns of Aks and Djer, seem to have been to the 
Delta The destination of the thin, shown in abbreviated form on a year label of 
Semesklhet, is not elilied, An ently for the reign of Den on the third register of he 
Palermo Stone records a royal visit i0 Herakleopolis to see the saered lake of the local 
god Harsaphes (rixf=f iterally ‘he who is upon his lake). 


Early dynastic teyre 190 


A wooden label of Ala ftom Abydos gives pride of place in the top register to a royal 
ıstofrover a he temple of Neill, a goddess wth close eomnectioas t0 ihe First Dynasty 
foyal fımily. ln later times, he mai cult centre of Neth was at Sal in the norlh-weslerns 
Delta. The second register of the label shows the shrine of ® wt at Bulo, supporing & 
Lower Egyptian seting for the events depicted. Of course, whether such a Yiait ever took 
place, or whether he label merely depicts an activity considered essential for the King to 
perfocm, is impossible to esteblish However, he excavation of a substantial Early 
Dynastic building at Buto which yielded at leasî onc official sealing daled to the rei of 
Aha makes an actual visit by the king a distinct possibiliy. 

"A year label of the following relg seems alko to secord a royal visît o the same two 
Delta ses. The right-hand side of the top register shows a cult installation comprising 
buildings under pale trees either side Of a wravy canal. Parallel depictions fom later 
sources confirm Buto as the location for this installation (Bietak 1994). The second 
fegister presents a confusing array of signs, but at the right, an oval enclosure containing 
he red crow may signify a cult centre at Sale, since the red crown was closely 
associated with the goddess Neith. The thin register clearly shows the royal bark, next to 
a town identilîed by a bird. Exactly the same locality may wel be depicted in he 
Coresponding register of the Aha year label 

“The fact that two consecutive Kings of the early First Dynasty chose 1o recon visits 
(real or symbolic) t0 the Delta is significant. The homage paid to Neth of Salt and 
Wadjet of Bulo by Aha and Djcr probably indicates the signiticance of both sites before 
he unification of Eyp__in the case of Bulo, this is confirmed by repent archaeological 
evidenceand emphasises one of the primary concems of the carly state: he 
determination 10 promote national unity trough ideology and theology. The 
incorporation of Wadjet in the royal tinulary—as tutelary goddess of the whole of Lower 
Eaypt and the pious references to Neth in the names of several Early Dynastic queens 
can be interpreted ss Iwo aspects of this programm. A visit by the king in person 1o the 
cult centres of he Iwo goddesses would doubdess have served 1 strengthen the 
ideological bonds which held Egypt together. 


Temple building and the dedication of divîne images 


A major duty of the king was to construct, beautify and maintain the temples of the gods 
He perfocmmed this both as their representive and to ensuke contined divine favour. Ih 
meory, therefore, the king was the ultimate high priest in every temple in the land. 
Implickly, all temples were monuments to the king as well as cult centres for the deities 
to whom hey were explicily dedicated (Quirke 1902:81). Furthermore, the continual 
celebration of cult in temples throughout the land was vital foe the preservalio of cosmic 
order, Royal involvement ia the life of temples could take one of two forms: the 
foundaron and construction of a new temple, accompanied by a conmplex series of rituals; 
Jora visit to an existing temple. We have see soyal visits lo the temples at Sals aad Buto 
depicted on First Dynasty year labels, and a visit to the sacred lke of Herakleopolis 
seeardel on the Palermo Stone, The soyal annals contain several seferences to temple. 
building projcets, as does a recently discovered year libel of Qan fiom Abydos. Temple 
foundation in the Eaely Dynastic period is dealt with in more detail in Chapter &. An 


important soyal activity throughout Egyptian history, the Early Dynastic sourees show 
what templecbuilding was considered a duty of kingship fiom the earliest ines. 

Afr the regular, biennial events _the “following of Hocus’ and fhe census—one of 
he most equent aeivities mentioned on the Palermo Slone is the fashioning or 
dedication (r) of a divine image. A cult image was the dselling-place for a deity, he 
physical embodiment of the divine peesence. The crenion of 3 new divine image 
necessitated the involvement of he king, since he was sole iatermmediary between he 
people and their deities, the high priest of every cult The practice of dediesting divine 
mages is considered in deuil in Chapter 8. The year labels and annals give us somme idea 
ofthe diversity of religious aetiviies undertaken by the king. The emphasis placed upoa 
he religious role of the King in the official record reflects is importance in Early 
Dynastic Egypt 


Military activi 


"Seenes of he king victorious over his enemies are not particularly common on year 
labels Only Iwo, one fron the reign of Aha and one from the reign of Den, show events 
of a militaristic nature. The Aha year label, fom Abydos, is incomplete, but seems to 
second (rial?) military action against Nubia. The ivory libel of Den from Abydos, 
ıalueady discussed, bean the legend xp Jp sqr 1301 “first time of smiling the castlemers) 
1F genuine, the label amay recoed an early punitive raid against Egypt's troublesome north 
easter nelghbours (Godron 1990). Four frugmentary year labels of Den hint at miliary 
campaigns against Westen Asia, as they seem 1o record the destruction of enemy 
stroagholds (Peuie 1900: pl. XV.16-18, 1902: pl. XL) 

Like the year labels, the annals of the Palermo Stone make oaly scant reference to 
military activity, A single entry on the third register refers to sq miv, “smiting the 
Bedouin’. The nomadic inhabitaats of the eastern of westem desert wete a persistent 
imitatioa to the Egyptian authorities, threatening the economy, stabiligy and cohesion of 
he new stute, and punitive mids were probably mounted at intervals to Keep them in 
cheek. Whether the reference is to an actual event, oF to he theoretical subjugation of 
FEzypI's enemies (a metaphor for containing the forecs of chaos, cannot be determined. 

Moce ieiguing are he two instances which seem to refer to attaeks on specific towns. 
The third register records an ataek on a localiey named wrt, determined by the usual 
town sign, indicating a setlement within Egypt. This is very signifcant, since seems 10 
suggest that a military campaign was mounted agains un Egyptian town. I is not 
unlikely that occasional rebellions within the newly unified country would have taken 
place during the Early Dynastic period, and î is possible that he Palermo Stone records 
he royal response to Just such a uprising. However, given the strong ideological content 
of he royal annals, a divet epcrelatioa between the writen record and historical evens 
cannot be assumed. ln the fourth register of the Palermo Stone, similar attacks on two 
tous are mentioned ln this instance, the localities, whose names may be read as im 
and AS (north are shown as rectangular, walled enclosures. It is possible taut they 
sepeeseat places ouside Egypl, although walled towns are also a feature of Early 
Dynastic seulement within Egypt The reign in question is probably that of Ninejer, and 
he ataek on in and 43 has been associated with he apparent disturbances in he 
middle ofthe Second Dynasty. 


Barly dynastic Haye 192 


Whether records of real events or expressions of ideal action, the references to military 
activity oa the Palermo Stone emphasise the coercive power of early kingship. They also 
esi o the role of the ruler as suppresser of dissent and disorder, whelher supernatural 
ıo human, from outside or inside his eal 


ARCHITECTURE AS A STATEMENT OF ROYAL POWER 


The sereklh and palacefuçade 


The seetê, enclosing the king's primary name and proclaiming his identity as he 
ineamation of Hous, has been gencrally ietepreted as depicting a section of the sende 
of he royal palace. The use of empty serelhs during the late Predynastic period shows 
hat the motif alone was a powerful and resdily understood syarhol of royal auhocity and 
ownership. The sole of the seetê in the early stages of Egyptian kingship not only 
emphasises the importance of iconography in establishing and propagating royal power, t 
ıalso indicates the significant part played by architecture in this process (Figure 6 8). 

1 ancient as in modern limes, the King's palace was a powerful symbol of the 
institution of monarchy and of royal authority. (Compare the use of the term ‘pharaoh’ 
fiom pr 3 ‘great house’ [ie ihe royal palace] 10 denote the king himself, from the 
New Kingdom onwards) What seems to have made the royal palace a particularly 
suitable molif for use within the emergent icoaography of rule was its distinctive 
appearance. The architectural style represented in Iwo dimensions by the serek panel is 
own 1o Egyptologiss as ‘palace-hçade”. The term denotes a mudbrick building with a 
series of recessed niches on the exterior walls, forming a decorative fıçade. Although he 
syle is now best atiested in Early Dynastic tombs and mortuary complexes, is 
connection with the soyal palace, Ioang assumed, has been confirmed by the excavation of 
a monumental First Dynasty gateway, presunably belonging to 4 royal palace, at 
Hierakanpolis in Upper Egypt (Weeks 1971-2 

The adopûon of niched mudbcick architecture by the ancient Egyptians seems to have 
ıcceurrel in the late Predynastie period. Although the earliest surviving examples of he 
syle date to he early Fist Dynusty (ihe Naqada royal tons and mastabı S3357 at 
Saqqara, both Ron the reign of Aha), royal buildings of this appearance must have been 
in existence several generations carier, probably as carly as Kaqada Hd (e. 1200 BCY 
Inde, the two buildings fiom Aka's reign show considerable sophistication in the 
deoraive use of mudbrick, suggesting that the style was already long-established in 
Eyî (Frankfort 1941334). 


Origins 


“There is litle doubt about the foreig origins of the palaee-facaile style (already noted by 
Balez 1930; argued for strongly by Frankfort 1941; or a more cautious interpeetuion see 
W.S Smith 198136; Kaiser 185b, 32, peoposes a Lower Egyptian origin). The similarity 
between Mesopotamian and Egyptian mudbriek architecture ts s0 close as to make thelr 
independent development highly unlikely (Frankfort 1941:338; Kemp 1975a: 103), As 
Wi he adoption oF Mesopotamian motifs into Egyptian royal iconography during 


Naqada Il, the process is likely to have involved an inagînative borrowing by the 
Egyptians Irom another culture to sui their own purposes: in both cases, he formulation 
ofa repertoire of symbols 1o embody the ideology of divine kingship. The construction of 
ıa large-seale building of exoûc appearance must have spoken 10 ts viewers of power and 
prestige. K must have conveyed Nt only tbe eeoaomie potential of the ruler, but also & 
Seran amount of awe. None the less, niched mudbrick acehiteetuee is unlikely t0 have 
been adopted merely foc its dnımatic impact. As with other borrowings from foreign 
clues during he period of stale formation and later, the Egyptian atitude seems 1o 
have been essentially pragmatic, If a neighbouring chilisatioa had already developed 
something for which the Egyptians perceived a nesl, the Egyplians showed no reûcenee 
in adopîng it, then modifying and adapting it to suit their own purposes, ultimately 
sereating a distinctive ‘Egyptian’ tradition. 


An expression of Elite tutus 


The eutent to which the palace-façade style of architecture became closely associated 
wil the King_and thus a symbol of the élite stutus which derived from access 1o he 
soyal court is highlighted by he large First Dynasty mastaba 1ombs at Saqqara (el. 
Kemp 1989:55). In common with contemporary dli burials at other sites, including Abu 
Rawash, Tarklhun und Naqada, these large mortuary constructions are decorated with 
recessed niches on their exterior walls, The arehixectural style proclaimed the status of he 
tomb owner, by emphasising his proximity 10 the ultimate source of power, he king, The 
êle symbolism of niebed architecture was so strong that it was even used for the inıernal 
walls of a Fist Dynasty infant burial st Minshut Abu Omar (Kreper 1992). Although 
invisible once the 1omb had been finished and covered, the power of the architectural 
ıSfyle to represent status was clearly undianinished 


The royal burial 


The major construction project of each reign in the arly Dynastic period seems to have 
been ihe royal mortuary complex. I not only served as the burial place of the ruler, but 
also ‘advertised and embodied ihe objectives of the. stute (Hoffman 1980.267). A 
monumental tomb symbolised both political power and communal leadership (Hofman 
T0335). 

The absolute authority of the ruler—his power over life and death - ras given literal 
expression ia a particularly chilling aspect of some First Dynasty royal burials at Abydos. 
The romibs on the Um el-Qaab and the accompanying funerary enclosures nearer the 
cultivation were surrounded by smaller graves, belonging 1o members of the royal 
estourage. The household of King Aka including his wives and other intimate 
anendants—was buried in a court cemetery, which strechal our from the royal tomb. 
From an analysis of he surviving skeletal remains, it appeass that none of the individuals 
was clef than 25 years, suggesting that the king s retainers followed meir royal master 
to the grave rather swifliy, whether voluntarily or by compulsion (Dreyer 1993: 11). 1a 
Subssquent reigns, the royal 10b was surrounded by a ring of subsidiary burials, he 
disxribution of the graves echoing the simıation in Ife. An altogether more absolutist form 


Bary dynastic Haymt 194 


Figure 68 Palace-facade architecture, 1. The origins 
and symbolic applications of an 
architectural style: (1) carly royal serek, 
incised on pottery vessels from (a) el-Beda 
wand (b) Tura; the panelled frame 
represents a section of the façade of the 
royal palace, and was used to denote royal 
owwmership ofthe storage jars thus marked 
(after Kaiser and Dreyer 1982.263, fig 
142, 7): (2) the lower part of the serekl 
carved in relief on the funerary stela of 


Djet, from Abydos (afer Kemp 1989:38, 
fig, I0): (3)a monumental gateway of 
mudbriek, excavated within the carly town 
of Nekhen (Hierakonpolis); the gate is 
thought to have marked the entrance to an 
Early Dynastic royal palace, hence 
confirming the appropriateness of the term 
‘palace façade’ to describe the 
characteristic niched style of architecture 
(aller Kemp 1989-40, fg. 11); (4) grave 
2275 from the Early Dynastic cemetery at 
Minshat Abu Omar, north-castem Delta; 
three of the intemal walls of the grave had 
been decorated with buttresses and niches 
in the ‘palace facade" style, indicating the 
symbolie potency of this type of 
architecture to express status, even when 
hidden from view (alter Kroeper 
1992.135, fig. 1). Notto same scale, 


feature can only be interpreted as an indication of retainer setifce: the members of the 
king's household were Killed (or eoammined suicide) when their of rule is expressed in 
several First Dynasty royal burials, where the mound over the King's tomb also covers the 
‘Sbsidiary burials surrounding the main chamber. Such a sovereign himself died, s0 that 
hey might accompany him in death as in life (Hofman 1980275-9). This practice, 
ıwhlle_no doubt for praclical and economic ressons__sras discontinued after the late 
First Dynasty, must have been a graphic ilustrarion of the ultimate authority of the King, 
not only during his earthly Hile but i the hereafter as well. The Hdeclogieal eoastrains of 
he time may have required suicide oa the purt of retainers. Oaly the king, as a meniber of 
he divine sphere, was guaranteed an aferlife in the company of the gods: others might 
hope for some share in an afterlife, by ‘hanging oato the King's coartails” and following 
hi directly to the next world (Compare the prsetice in Japan, once widespread, whereby 
devoted followers of he emperor would cotmmit rial suicide at his death, in onder to 
fellow him into the next wo. A number of individuals made this utimale expression of 
loyalty as recently as 1991, on the death of Emperor Hirohito) Be that as ft may, the 
impetus for such a pesetict in Early Dynastic Egypt is likely t0 have come fro the top 
downwards: the king required an entourage in the afierlife, and individual servants may 
have had liule or no choice about following him hen 

The funerary enclosures at Abydos and Hieeakonpolis were impressive constructions, 
consciously resembling the royal palace (Plate 62). Their visiblity was an impoant 
aspect of their function. By contrast, he king's actual burial place (the royal tomb) 
falîlled a rahe different purpose, providing an etermal resting place foc the king and the 
wherewithal for his afterlife. Hence, vo conflicting factocs aflected the appearınce and 


Early dynastic Haye 196 


location of the royal tanib, remoteness and visibility. Unlike their Predynastic forebears, 
whose tombs were located side-by-side with no-royal burials (in Abydos Cemetery U), 
he Kings of the Fit Dynasty chose 10 emphasise their unique status, and tl 
sepursteness fom the 


ıte 6.2 Palace-fscade architecture, 2. The 
characteristic niched style as applied to the 
enclosure walls of royal mortuary 
complexes: (top) the eastern wall of the 


Shunet ez-Zebib, Khasekhemwy's 
mudbrick funerary enclosure at Abydos 
(author's photograph); (bottom) the 
eastem wall of the step pyramid complex 
from the following reign (author's 


photograph). 


rest of humanity, by buildîng their tombs in an isolated spot, surrounded in death only by 
heir closest retainers. Whilst the highest oftieials of the administration were granted the 
privilege of tombs on the escarpment at North Saqqara, overlooking fhe Early Dy 
ily of Memphis, the First and lute Second Dynasty Kings chose 10 be buried 
ancestral royal necropolis of Abydos. Not only did he location of the soyal tombs 
feinforee the legitirmaey of the ruling line by emphasising descent from the Predynastie 
fulers of This_it also expressed the unique, unrivalled postion of the king st the head of 
FEyptlan socio. 

AS “he principal public statement on the nature of kingship’ (Kemp 1989:53), he 
soyal mortuary complex is of key importance for cur understuading of Early Dyaistie 
FEaypt. The development of the royal tomb and the sophisticated syrabolianı of mortuary 
sarehitoeture fom the subject of the next chapter. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
ROYAL MORTUARY ARCHITECTURE 


The most enduring monuments from Early Dynastic Egypt are not the temples of national 
or provincial deities but he funerary constructions of kings, their relarives and high 
oficial. During The course of the first three dynasties, Egypl's ruling class developed 
mortuary architecture as a potent expression of authority. Royal building projecls 
necesskated the development of a sophisticsted administrative apparatus to organise the 
human and tnalerial resources required. The construction of the king's tomb also fulfilled 
ıa number of practical functions, offering the King sad his officials an arena in which to 
demonstrate leadership, providing a focus for the conspicvous consumption of prestige 
and impoded materials, and coafirming the legitimacy of fhe heir to the throne by Nis 
participation in the burial of his peedecessor (Hofman 180-3278), 

The various elements of a mortuary complex sepresent a sophisticated symbolic 
vocabulary, proclaiming the ovmer's status, embodying the ideology of divine kingship 
and rellecling coatempocary conceptions of the afertite. Mortuary archieeture > 
especially royal mortuary architecture, which was both more visible and more durable 
than the burials of ordinary peoples thus a rich source of evidence for Early Dynastic 
society, This chapter follows the chronological development of royal mortuary 
architecture, discussing both the changes 1o the royal tomb over the course of the Early 
Dynastic period and the symbolism embodied in royal mortuary complexes, 


THE MORTUARY COMPLEXES OF THE EARLY DYNASTIC 
KING: 


Royal funerary monuments of the first three dynasties cluster at two principal sites and 
compeise wo main types of structure, The ancient royal necropolis of Abydos_more 
specifcaly, he area Known by its modern Aeabie name Urn el-Qanb (iterally ‘mother 
of pots’, Roa the vast quantities of offering pottery Iinering the sile}twas the focus of 
royal burials throughout the First Dynasty, and again at the ead of the Second Dynasty 
(Figure 7.1) The necropolis of Seqqara, overlooking the capital city of Memphis, vras the 
favoured location for royal ioterments during The eszly pafl of the Second Dynasty, and 
became the primary royal burial ground fom the beginning of the Third Dynasty (Figure 
T2). There was, thus, sn akermaton between Abydos and Saqqara during the course of 
ıe Early Dynastic peliod, probably depending upon the political and religious currents of 
ihe time. At boll sles, but more obviously at Abydos, royal mortuary provision 
comprised wo distinct elements: the tomb itself and an accompanying seetanguls 

enclosure for he celebration of funerary ceremonies andor the King's mortuary cult 
During the First and Second Dynasties, these two elements were geographically separate, 


but were fused at the begianing of the Third Dynasty, as exemplified in the Step Pyramid 
complex of Nerjerikhet 

‘The development of the royal tomb reflects both technological and theological 
advances; the design of he royal mortuary complex has been sail to highlight he 
multiple role of the king as ruler und representative of the gods (Brake 1979:157-62) 
Both symbolic and practical considetaions will have affected ıhe planning ani 
construction of the royal tomb, including such factors as axial alignment, symmetry, 
parallelism, centrality and duality (om the symbolic side), topography, ssuronomical 
alignment and teclnolagy (on the practical side). Royal mortuary architecture alko serves 
was an index of political change, and not only through fhe choice of location for the King's 
tomb, From the reign of Aha onwards, here appears to have been a marked increase in 
mortuary elaborttioa, attested by the large mastaba at North Saqqara (S3351), the royal 
tomb at Naqada, and the greater size of the king's our burial complex at Abydos, This 
development has been interpreted as reflecting the greater economic and politieal security 
brought about by the consolidation of the Egyptian state at the beginning of the First 
Dynasty (Brinks 1979:61). Against a background of increased peosperity and more 
ıeflicient central contol of resources, he Early Dynastic Kings sought to emphasise their 
unique postion at the hesd of Egyptian society, above all through he ‘monumental scale 
sand distinctive architectural symbolism of thelr mortuary constructions (Kemp 1989:53). 


Firat nasty 


The royal tombs oa the Una el-Qab 


Abydos had been a burial ground for royalty since early Predynastie times, serving the 
Rulers of the Thinite region Rom at least the Naqada 1 period (c. 3800 BC). According to 
Manetho, he rulers of the First Dynasty originated fron This (Thinis), and their decision 
to be buried at Abydos, in the ancestral royal necropolis, probably reflects their family 
ties The choice of Abydos may have Bern made for one, equally compelli 

(Kemp 1966:19). The site was of great antiquity, and ies ‘ancient sancti 
doublets have conferred an added superatural legitimacy upon hose buricd there (e 
Kemp 1967:25). (This may have been the primary reason for the re-adoption of he 
cemetery by two kings at the end of the Second Dynasty. ) Moreover, the site's impressive 
natural setting at the foot of a dramatic ridge, and directly aligsed with a prominent 
Cleft in the line of hills _ may have increased the visual impact of the tombs. Before we 
lok at aspects of individual complexes, und the chronological development over he 
course of he Fit Dynasty, it will be useful to describe the general features of » royal 
tomb on the rmn el Quab. 


Bary drastic Haye 0 


ا 
١‏ 


کک اوت 


eS wa 


~r 


| 
| 
| 
أ 
ا 
أ 
ا 
ا 
ا 
| 


Figure 7.1 The royal cemetery at Abydos. The plan 
shows the contiguity of the three cemetery 
areas designated by modem archacologists 
as Cemetery U (Predynastic) Cemetery B 
(late Predynastic to carly First Dynasty), 
and the Umm cl-Qaab (First Dynasty) 
(afer Spencer 1993:76, fig. 53; Dreyer et 
al 1996: fig). 


GENERAL FEATURES 


“At its most basie, each tomb consists of ‘a. large square pit lined with bciekuwork' (Petrie 
1900:4). The suirounding chanbers which served as subsidiary burials in lute First 
Dynasty tombs _are offen at a higber level than he main burl chamber. ln the tanbs of 
Dier and Djet the surrounding sooms open OIF the central chumber, fron the time of 
Memeith onwards, they surround the burial chamber but do not interconnect. The tombs 
of the kings fom Aha 10 Anedjib inclusive are accompanied by sınges of smaller, 
subsidiary burials These are arranged in rows or blocks, either adjacent to the royal tomb 
or surrounding it. 

Unlike he contemporary mastabas at Norh Saqqam which emphasised he 
superstructure, the First Dynasty royal tombs at Abydos seen t have concentrated on the 
Subterranean clement. During the carly First Dynasty she burial chamber vas dug 
progressively deeper, culminating with the tomb of Den ia which he burial chamber is 6 
Metres Below ground level. None the less, the superstrucure of the tomb was a 
symbolically important component. Few, if any, traces of superstructure have survived 
from the Predynastic soyal Iombs st Abydos, Hicrakonpolis and Naqada; but it has been 
argued that the superstructure of the First Dynasty royal tombs is likely ıo have evolved 
from these earlier burials (Kemp 1989:53). The sppearince of the cariy First Dynasty 
tombs remains uncertain, although a simple mound of earth covering the burial chanber 
seems likely. The existence of any visible superstructure has been doubted (O'Connor 
1991:7, cotra Dreyer 1991), although it seems improbable that the tomb would have 
been entirely unmarked oa the surface (cf Dreyer 1991102). The superstruetures of he 
mid- and later Fist Dynasty tombs (fom he reign of Dit onwards) apparently 
Comprised two elements: a hidden tumulus over the burial chamber and a larger mound 
covering the whole tomb (Dreyer 1991). The hidden tumulas was entirely contained 
wihin the grave pil, and was iself covered by the large grave mound. Consequently, it 
can have fulfilled no architectural purpose and must, therefore, have had a symbolic 
fincan. The provision of not one but Two tumuli suggests that ihe symbol of a mound 
had great importance for the deceased; it may eventually have bezn regarded as essential 
for he resurrection of the dead in the grave (Dreyer 1991:1010, As « highly symbolic 
feature, the hidden humulus also found its way into the coatempocary mastabas at Noh 
Saqqara. Several mastabas (for example, S1507 Ron the reign of Den) were found lo 
contain the sermgins of a concealed sand and rubble mound covering the burial chambe 
completely hidden ftom view by the xest of the superstructure. As we have seen ih 
Chapter 3, the mound inside Saqqar mastaha S3038, ftom the reiga of Anedjih, had a 
stepped appearance, foreshadowing the fom of the Third Dynasty step pyramids If he 
architecture of the élite tombs at North Saqqara kept pace with, and indeed mimicked, the 
architecture of the royal tombs at Abydos, then the supersinuctures of the late First 
Dyrasty toms oa the Umm ckQsab may also have been steppe This hypothesis 
seseives some support ftom the iconographic evidence, including the depiction of stepped 
ıstnehures_idenûfied by some as ihe royal tomb _on inscribed stone bowls of he lte 
Fist Dynasty. One scholar has gone so far as 10 suggest that the superstructures of all 
yal tabs until the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty ‘can reasonably be assumed 1o 
have been sepped' (Rol 1993-434). 

A pair of stelae bearing the name of the royal oummer probably stood in front of the 
toh, on The east side, although none was fouad br sl (Petrie 1900:6) 


Barly drastic Haye 2 


SEQUENCE OF DEVELOPMENT 


The sequence of royal tombs ftom the first half of the First Dynasty shows rapid and 
drautie development (cf. Kaiser and Dreyer 1982:245-60). The tomb complex st he 
hend of the Early Dynastic sequence comprises three elements, two brick ined chambers 
(BI and B2) and un adjacent offeeing-pit cut into the surface (BO). The conmplex has been 
ascribed 10 a King *1ry-Hor on the basis of seakimpressions and inseribed vessels found 
in the brick-lined chanıbers (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982232-5; this attribution is disputed 
by Wilkinson 1993; O’Brien 1996:1312). 1 has been questioned whether the ho brick 
lined chambers belonged o the same burial, since “oae would have expected. ..that if BI 
and 2 were parts of the same tomb they would...have been given fhe same orientation’ 
(Kemp 196622), This part of the cemetery has suffered greatly fiom disturbance and 
mixing of the tomb coments, so that he date and ownership of BO'L/2 must rermuin in 
some doubt. 

"None Ihe les, r seems to have been customary for kings of late ‘Dynasty O" to build a 
tomb composed of mo separate chambers. The adjacent chambers B7 and B9 almost 
certainly belonged 1o King ‘Ka’, probably Narmer's immediate predecessor, Narmer 
himself conabined two chambers in one large pil, producing his double tomb BIT/IS. 
Same doubls have been expressed sas to whether BÎ?18 really represents Narmer's toenb. 
It would seem a rather insignifcant monument for so peominent s King, and there ae 
unexplored parts of the Abydos necropolis which mig conceal a rmore impressive tomb. 
Only by a thorough exploeation of the emire Ummm el-Qanb can we hope t0 solve he 
ddl 

Narmer's successor Aha seems to have reverted to the earlier custom, building his 
chambers separately, 8d on a tmuch larger scale (Kemp 1966:22), His mortuary complex 
comprises Three large chambers (BIO, BIS and B19), eo smaller pits (B13 and B14) and 
ıa series of 34 subsidiary burials (B16), mostly in three parallel rows, speeading eastwards 
(Perrie 1901: pl. LIX) The graves of retainers which accompany Al's tomb appear as a 
new feature kn royal mortunry provision, one that was to remin standard at Abydos 
roughout the First Dynasty. K wras once suggested that the westermmost chamber of the 
Aha complex, B19, may have been built earlier than the other wo. Its aturibution 1o an 
ıcplhemeral successor of Aha is not supported by any iaserîptioas and has been rejected as 
‘unconvincing (Kemp 196622). There seems Hile doubt that all three chambers, 
BIOIS/I9, belong 1o one and the same complex, given their near identical size and other 
similarities, The slightly different ofientation of chamber B10 may indicate hat it was 
buil rst (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982219). The two chambers to the west of BI9 (BIS and 
B14) show similarities 10 Nanmer's double 1omb (BITIISY: he northemm chamber is 
smaller than the southern, and contained two postholes, perhaps fiom a wooden 
construction within the pit Hence, chambers B13 and B14 nay represent an earlier stage 
in Ah's mortuary complex, modelled closely on the tomb of his predecessor, Once the 
ree min chambers had been built, BI4 seems to have become the tomb of a person 
ıcalled Henerib (Rur-1b) (Petrie 1901:5) 

To the east of Aha’s complex lies 4 four-chumbered tomb, illustrated by Petrie on his 
cemetery plans but neither numbered nor described by hir. Rocctly designated chamber 
BS (Dreyer 1990.68). the toh has been recexeavated by the German expedirion, which 
found ico be completely empty, but foc a small bone label inscribed with some numerals 
and a few faienee beads. Lack of evidence makes the ding and anwibutioa of BS 


impossible. None the less, its orientation, the same as B79 and BITIIS, may be 
ısignifican. I. may have been the tomb of oac of Aha's predecessors; King ‘Seopion has 
been suggested as a possible occupant (Dreyer 1990:71, alhough the archaeological and 
iorieal indications point 1o him having been buried at Hieeakonpolis (Brinks 
1on9:148). 

Equally mysterious is the adjacent pit, labelled B40 (Dreyer 1990:70), Discovered 
beneath a deposit of laler offering-potiery, B40 showed no signs of any walling material 
such as mdrick It has been mooted as he tomb of "Ahothis 1, a supposed ephemeral 
successor of Aha (Dreyer 1990:71) 

‘The tomb complex of Djer, Aha's successor, shows a number of new features, The 
main burial chaniber wras provided wih a serics of recesses, painted red, perhaps carly 
false doors (Perie 1901:8) The subsidiary burials numbering 314, the most of any 
royal tomb at Abydos—were arranged in two groups. One large bloek is leaked to the 
northeast of ihe king's iomb, another gfup surrounds the tomb oa all four sides, with a 
ap to he southwest (Petrie 1901: pls LV, LX-LXD). 

Many of ihe subsidiary graves accompanying the tomb of Dict coatained crudely 
inscribed and roughly inikshed private stelae, giving the name (and sometimes title) of the 
deceased. ln addition, some of the graves Nere identified by having he names of their 
occupants ‘inscribed in red paint oa the walls" (Pete 1900:8). The tomb of Djet was the 
only tomb on the Unum el-Qeab t0 preserve evidence of the ocigiaal superstructure. A 
retaining wall of mudbricks held in place a tunmulus of earth which covered the burial 
Chamber (Petrie 190029) but did not ise above the ground surface. Another feature of 
Djet’s burial, unparalleled in the other First Dyaasty royal tombs at Abydos, is the 
presence of ceramic s3-signs, which were apparently placed in niches in the burial 
Chamber to provide extra protection for the deceased king (B.Adanms 1994). 

The tomb of Memeith shows great regulriy and precision in its constuction. A 
central burial chamber is surrounded by eight store oon, and the whole is encircled by 
ıa line of subsidiary graves (Peuie 1900: pl. XI, As ia the tomb of Die, the ring of 
‘subsidiary graves is broken at he south-west camer, providing a direct sight.line between 
he burial chamber and the cleft in the cliITs behind he Umm el Quab The Egyptians 
may have believed this clef to be an encrance to the underwocld (Punch 1991:56 7: el, 
RFiedman 1994:17). 

The tomb of Den eas deseribed by Petrie as ‘one of the most costly and sumptuous" 
(Parte 1900:11). Ir shows several unique features, emphasising Dens seign as a culkural 
high point of the Early Dynastic period The burial chanber was paved with slabs of pink 
grane fromm Aswan, the largest use of granite unıil the Step Pyramid complex of 
Nejerikhet (Petrie 1901:9). Another innovation is the entrance stairway which gives 
access to the burial chamber, crossing the east ange of subsidiary graves. This must have 

ıa threat to the security of the burial, and was therefore bloeked by a stone 
slab, Unique oa the Lmn el-Qanb is the separate annex with its ow 
staircase, located at the south-west comer of Den's 1omb (Petrie 1901:11; Dreyer 
1980:76 9, fes 7-8). A limestone block ia the furthest room strongly indicates 
pedestal, perhaps for a taroe, Given the proximity of the annex 1o the king's burial 
Chumbef, t is unlikely that such a statue would kave been other than of the king himself 
(Dreyer 1990:77). This hypothesis leads to an entirely new imerpretaion of the annex as 
ıa whole. The far room may be seen as a forerunner of the serdab, housing the statue of 


Early drastic Haye Dt 


he deceased king for his mortuary cult. The staircase leading to the annex has been 
interpreted as providing not an crance but an exit for he king's ka. The two pits in front 
ofihe annex may have been the graves of particularly favoured retainers, o¢ altematively 
oîcials connected in some way with the King's mortvary cult. The orientation of the 
annex to the south-west is unlikely 1o have been unintentional, and may be linked 1o the 
Course of the Cireat Wadî whieh coanects the Ummm cl-Qaab and the site of the funerary 
ıenclosures neater the cultivation (Dreyer 1990:78) 

The small size and poor, apparently hasty construction of Anedjib's tomb (Petrie 
1900:12) can be explained if it s regarded as an ‘emergency burial" (Kaiser and Dreyer 
1982.251). Kis possible hat he King died unexpectedly, forcing the rapid completion of 
ıa toh without the necessary time for an elabocate monument. As in the tomb of Den, he 
Entrance stairway approaches he tomb from the cast, perhaps oriented 10 1he rising sun. 

The tomb of Semerkhet shows a new development: the subsidiary graves are built 
immediutely adjoining he burial chamber, foeming a single, unified structure (Petrie 
1900:13, pl LX). This is of great sîgnifeance, since ‘it would appear probable that the 
superstrncture covered not only the burtal chumber bur also the subsidiary graves 
(Emery 1961:85). I follows that the occupants of the subsidiary graves must have been 
buried at the same time as the King himself. Hence, he tomb of Semerkhet seems 1o 
repeeseat the first proven instance of retainer saerilice 


اي ڪڪ 


کر 


ھ0 


ا ر 


late 7.1 The tomb of Qaa, during re-excavation by 
the German Archaeological Institute in 
1992 (author's photograph). 


This arrangement was maintained in the tomb of Qaa (Emery 1961:87; Plate 7.1) 
Initial excavation Of Qas s tomb suggested ‘hasty and defective construction" (Pewie 
1900:14) many of the bricks seem 10 have been used before they had dried completely: 
leading 1o the collapse of some walls but recent reexeavation has shown thot the 


monument was built in several phases, apparently over a long period of time (Engel, im 
Dreyer er al 1996:5771), The objects recovered fom the toes af Qaa by Petrie indicate 
at separate chambers were reserved for dillerent categories of tomb equipment 
(Hofinan 1980.272). A new feature is the direction of the entrance stairway, which is 
now oriented to the north (Petrie 1900:4. This foreshadows the Second Dynasty royal 
onbs at Saqqara and he step pyramid complexes of the Thin Dynasty which were 
aligned to the north. 


Funerary enclosures 


From the reign of Diet oavtanls, t has been suggested that the “twin tomb of the late 
Predynastic and early Fist Dynasty kings was replaced by a single tomb on the Ummm el 
Quah, aceompanied by a separate funerary enclosune on the low desert nearer he 
ıcalivatioa (Kaiser 196496-102). The intemal architecture of the late Predynastic lom 
«j supports the Identification of the lure enclosures as “funerary palaces" (Kemp 
1966:16. Their symbolic and arehiteetural similarities with the Step Pyramid enclosure 
of Nejerikhet (Kaiser 1969) lend added weight to the hypothesis, although other 
interprelatioas have been suggested (Lauer 198:23, Helck 1972). Whilst he loag- 
term function of an enclosure may have been as a focus for he royal mortuary cult 
(O'Connor 1991:5, 7 and an arena for the cemal pageantry of kingship (Kaiser 
1969:17), on a more pesctieal level each enclosure may have serve to protect the body of 
he deecsed king until all fhe burial preparstioas had been coanpleted. The permanent 
building Hdentiîed in the south-east comer of Peribsea's and Khasekheanwy's enclosures 
may have housed the body of the dead king or sheltered his successor during the burial 
preparations, ln addition, the enclosure may have been the locatioa for some of the 
faneral ceremonies (Kaiser 1969:1819). 

‘To date, no enclosure atributable to Kamer or Aka has been located. None the less, 
he existence of futher enclosures oa the low desert is quite plausible, given he 
extensive area of largely unexeavated ground soul of he Coptic village, Deir Sitt 
Damiana. First Dynasly funerary remains have been found over 4 wider aren stil, 
extending to the north-west of the village (Kemp 1966:15). Since the tomb of Nanmer has 
no subsidiary burials, his funerary enclosure (f he had one) may, likewise, kave siood 
alone. Without the lines of graves such as those that demarcate he enclosures of Djer and 
Diet, a possible carly enclosure would be very difficult to identify arehaeologieally 
(Kaiher 1969:3, 3). 

i was thought that he great size of the Djer and Djet enclosures precluded their 
having been permanent constructions of smudbriek (Kaiser 1969:3), but recent fieldwork 
has uncovered evidence of a mudbriek wall inside the Djer monument (O'Connor 1989, 
vindicating Kemp 1966:15). From the reign of Den, the enclosures were decorted with 
simple niches on three sides and more clasoeate niches on the side facing the culivatioa 
(Lauer 196983, 1988:5). The middle of the First Dynasty also wimessed a sharp 
seductioa in the size of the moaument (ef Kemp 1966: pl. VII: Kaiser 1960:3). Oaly at 
‘he end of the First Dynasty did funerary enclosures once again approach the size of the 
Der and Djet monuments: the massive mudbcick walls of Der Sitt Damiana may 
incomporate the funerary enclosure of Qua (Ayton «1 al 19042-3; Kaiser 19692) The 
lte Fist Dynasty seems 10 have been charmcterised by a shi in emphasis and. 


Early drastic Haymt N6 


comespondingly, in expenditure—ffom fhe tomb on the Umm el-Quab to the funerary 
enclosure nearet the town (Kaiser and Dreyer 1982251). The chunge may reflect « 
conscious move towards more prominent royal funerury monuments as the visible 
expressions of divine kingship, 

‘Like the enclosures of Djcr and Djet the structure attributed to Queen Memeith or her 

son Den (Kaiser 1969:1-2) is demarcated by lines of subsidiary burials. A deposit of First 
Dynasty pouery found inside the Mermeitl Den enclosure (Kemp 1966:1617) suggests 
shat a building nce existed here, s in the enclosures of the late Second Dynasty The so- 
called Wete Mastaba' lies immediately adjacent to he Memeith/Den enclosure, and 
‘shares the same dimensioas and orientation. lis he earliest preserved enclosure 10 show 
he wo types of niche decoration: siple niches on the nortla-west, sour west and south- 
east sides and a more complex patter of niches oa the north-east wall (Kemp 1966:14) 
It provides a model for he reconsruction of the Memeith'Den enclosure although, unlike 
he alter, is not provided with any subsidiary burials, This suggests taut i dates to he 
later purt of the First Dynasty, when the peaetice of subsidiary burials was apparently 
dying out (Kemp 1966:15} It has been plausibly attributed to Semerkhet, penultimate 
king of he First Dynasty, If the MermeitDen enclosure is attributed to Den and the 
Westen Mastaba' 1o Semerkhet, then the only two rulers of the mid-and lte First 
Dynasty without an denilîed funerary enclosure would be Merneith and Anedjîh. The 
unique position oF the former as queen reget but not monareh in her own right could 
explain her lack of a funerary enclosure; the absence of an enclosure for Anedjîb could be 
explained by the apparent ‘emergency nature of his tomb (Kalser snd Dreyer 1982.254, 
a4) 

A possible enclosure dated to the reign of Den has been identified at Saqqara, in 
addition to his putative funerary ebclosure st Abydos. A group of graves excavated ear 
he Serapeum (Macrumallah 1940) has been interpreted as demareaûng a ritual area 
(Kaiser 19858). However, fhe burials are not sll contemporary and the rows are not 
aligned at 90 degrees. The purpose of he feature is unknown, but one suggestion is hat it 
was used for the embalming of the decease king assuming that he dial at Memphis — 
before he body was taken south 1o Abydos for burtal. Other similar enclosures of he 
First Dynasty have not yet cane to Iigbt at Saq qar, although there ace large unexeavated 
areas in the ortlxwestem part of the she, and i is quite possible that olhers may have 
existed along or on the edges of the Wadî Abusir. Alermatively, the Den installation 
could have been used by subsequent kings of the late First Dyhasty, and this could 
account for the later dating of some of the graves (Kaiser 1985a). The proposal that he 
graves are subsidiary burials surounding a large First Dynasty masaba (Swelim 
901:302) seems unlikely since resistivity work in the area has uncovered no traces of 
any sumuctuse (Jefiieys and Tavares 1994:150 and n. 43). 


Second mast 
Saqqan 


GALLERY TOMES 


"The kings of the carly Second Dynasty chose to abandon the ancestral royal cemetery of 
Abydos in favour of a new location overlooking he capital, This change in location mast 
be signiticant, bur the underiying cessons remain obscure (el, Roll 1993:48). Not only 
did the tombs of he early Secoad Dynasty kings inaugurate a new royal cemetery, they 
also present an entirely new concepton in royal mortuary architecture, bod in tems of 
ther size and layout (Kaiser 1992-182: ef. Munro 1903:49). Gone are the lines of 
subsidiary Burials so charscteritie of the First Dynasty royal tombs and funerary 
enclosures at Abydos, The prıctice of retainer sacrifice seems 10 have died with Qa, « 
shortlived and no doubt wasteful experiment in absolute power. The two Second 
Dynasty royal tombs at Saqqara identified with ceainty now lie beneath the causeway 
and pyramid of Unas (for etanmple, Spencer 1993-105, i. 80). Both tombs coaiprise « 
series of galleries, wilh blocks of siore1ooms opening ofl a central, descending corridor 
hewm ia the bedrock. Sealinge found in the weste gallery tomb bore the names of 
Hetepsekhemuy and Nebca. The casters gallery lob contained aumerous sealings of 
Ninejer, hind king of the dynasty, entifytng him as the probable owner. 

‘The entrance sectioa of the Hetepsekhenmwy complex, open to the air after is initial 
construction, was subsequently covered by large limestone bioeks (Munro 1993-49). The 
fist secies OF magazines opens oft the descending corridor, but acess to the second 
series of magazines is blocked st the bolton of this corridor by a large granite porteullis 
slab. Three further slabs block the coaridor at intervals (Stadelmann 1985.296) The 
published plan of the complex (Lauer 1936:4, fig. 2; Fischer 1961:46 8, ig. 9; Spencer 
1993:104, fig. 719) ‘differs somewhat from ihe detailed verbal aceount given by the 
excavator” (Roh 1993-43; ef, Rarsantî 1902). In particular, the layout of he chunbers is 
‘hy no means as regular and rightangled as depicted (Dodson 1996:22). 1n plan, he 
Hetepsekhetmwy complex is very similar 10 comtemporary private tomabs (Ruth 1993:4 
The suite of rooms at the southern end of the galeries includes a large chamber 1o the 
west of the central axis, comparable to the burial chamber in Secoad Dynasty private 
tombs, and a more complex group of chambers to the east, reminiscent of the bedroom 
lavatory hathron combinaien found in private tombs. The layout of the innermost 
chambers clearly imitates fhe private apartments of a house (Munro 199349; Roth 
1993:44) and indicates that the tomb ras conceived as a house for the ka of the deceased. 


Early drastic Haye 8 


Figure 72 The royal cemetery at Saqqara. The plan 
shows the large number of Early Dynastic 
features in this part of the Memphite 
necropolis: (1) a group of graves dating to 
the reign of Den, possibly ourlining a 
ritual arena; (2) and (3) two large 
rectangular enclosures of uncertain date 
(named the Ptah-hotep enclosure and the 
Gist elMudir, respectively); (4) a set of 
underground galleries forming the tomb of 

Hetepsekhemwy andlor Nebra; (5) the 

nd 
galleries, forming the tomb of Ninetjer, (6) 


the Step Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet, 
incorporating several sets of underground 
galeries which may represent carlier royal 
tombs; (7) the unfinished step pyramid 
complex of Sekhemkhet (afer Jeftreys 
and Tavares 194:166, fig. 7; Lauer 1962: 
pls 6-a, 148). 


The Ninetjer galleries follow a similar plan (Kaiser 192:180, ig, 44), although they 
cover a larger total area. Once again, the roms do not follow a regular arrangement, 
perhaps due to the poor qualiy of the bedrock (Dodson 1996-22) There remains a small 
dren adjacent 1o the Unus Causeway whee races ofthe original superstructure are visible 
(Munro 1903:49). The superstructure seems to have comprised wo distinct elerents. To 
he noch, a platforms fcored with clay extended over an area somme 20 metres det, 
covering ihe outer passages anı chambers of the lob it may kave been used ıs 4 sexing 
for funerary ceremonies To ihe south, s rock-step may mark the loeuon of 4 more 
massive, mastaba superstructure (Leclant and Clerc 1993.207; Dodson 199622). The 
foekxcu trench, noted by several writers as a prominent feature in thls part of the Saqqara 
necropolis, muy mark the edge of a platform upon whic the Second Dynasty royal tombs 
were built Two altemative reconsttuetions have been proposed for the superstructure of 
Hetepsekenmwy’s tomb: either a simple mastaba with sloping walls o¢ a niched mastaba, 
Ike the Fist Dynsly mastabas at Non Saqqara. The arehseologist excavating the 
Nineljer complex considers it unlikely that he Second Dynasty gallery tombs were 
covered by lage mastabu-like superstruetures, because of the immense quantities of 
ımuterîal which would have been required for such constuction (Munro 1993:50), and 
because lirle or no trace Of massive superstnuetures hus survived, However, it is possible 
hat ihe supestnuctures were levelled by Nejerikhet during the coostruetioa of 
weslatgement of his Step Pyramid complex, and the material reused (ef Munro 1993-48, . 
49 The location of the Step Pyramid complex may indicate that ihe Second Dynasty 
superstructures were sil sanding «hen Neğerikhet's monumeat was initially planned 1n 
any case, Ihe Second Dynasty tombs must have been in ruins by the Fifh Dyas 
allowing nas to level the site for his pyramid complex. 

‘To jullge fro the iaserîptioa on the statue of the priest Hetepdiel, he mortuary cult of 
he first three Second Dynasty kinge was celebrated at Saqqura. Nebra's funerary 
monument must therefore have been located here (Studelmann 1985.298). He 
usurped he gallery lomb begun by his predecessor Hetepsekhemuy. Alert 
separate moruary complex adjacent to the Hetepsekhermwy avd Ninejer tombs might 
have been incorporated into Neljerikhet's grand building scheme. The galleries beneath 
ihe Western Massif of the Step Pyramid complex may have becn a Second Dynasty royal 
oanb, given their size and general layout (contra Roth 1993.43, n. 40), These galleries 
have been suggested as the tomb of Sened (Dodson 199624) or Khasekhemwy 
(Stadelmann 1985.299), but they could equally have been built foc Nebra. Recent 
fieldwork to he west of the Step Pyramid complex has revealed another, possibly royal, 
Sesond Dynasty tomb (Giddy 1997a: 28), while the unfinished galleries beneath the 
North Court of he complex may represen further tombs of this date, incorporated by 
Negjerikhet into the final phase of his funerary monument. 


Barly dynastic Haye 210 


The precise choice of location for the Second Dynasty royal ombs was probably 
influenced by the natural topography, in particular a wadî or natural depression running 
to the south OF the Step Pyramid complex (Leclant and Clerc 1994-381). Although set 
furiher back i the dese than the @ite tombs at North Saqqara, and therefore wisible 
fiom the culivaion to the east, he Second Dynasty royal tombs would have been 
‘equally, if not more, prominent as viewed fro the Abusir valley: (Jeffteys and Tavares 
104:151). f he Early Dynastic centre of Memphis did indeed lie ia the vicinity of Lake 
Abusi the sîgbt-ine up the Abusir valley would help to explain the location of all the 
Farly Dynastic monuments of westem Saqqars, including the possible eulkic enclosure of 
Den, the Second Dynasty royal sonmbs, and the anonymous rectangular enclosures 
efireys and Tavares 1994-151, 166 fig. 7, 168 g9). 


ENCLOSURES 


Among the most mysterious monuments in Egypt are the two large, anonymous 
enclosures 1o the west of the Nejerithet and Sekhemkhet complexes (Swelim 1991) 
Named the Pahhotep enclosure and the Gisr el-Mudir (‘great enclosure’ they are 
believed by some scholars to be further, unfinished step pyramid enclosures of he Third 
Dynasty (Wilduag 1960a: 136-7, Edwards 1993:93). However, fhe Gisr el-Mudir shows 
no signs of a building at ts centre (Mathieson and Tavares 1903:30), and it would have 
been extremely difficult and impractical 1o construct a pyramid once the enclosure wall 
had been completed (Stadeimaan 1985.305). (Compare the Sekhermkhct complet, where 
he uaderground chambers of the pyramid had been faished when he enclosure wall was 
only six courses high) The Pahhotep enelosure, immediately to the west of the Step 
Pyramid complex, does show a large mudbriek rectangular structure’ at the cen 
where there are also fragments of limestone” (Mathieson and Tavares 1993-28), 
Unfortunately, the nature of this structure has not been established. lt has been plausibly 
suggested that the Sagara enclosures were counterparts 10 the ‘funerury enclosures" at 
Abydos (Stadelmann 185:307). In this case, they may have been buil to accompany the 
nerby royal tombs of the Sevond Dynasty, notably ihe galleries of Hetepsekhemwy and 
Nineljer (Kaiser 1985a: 54, . 39, for an akernative view). Less plausibly, the Puahhotep 
enclosure has been attributed to Khasekhenry (Stadelnann 185:306), although there 1s 
no indication thar this king ever constructed 3 funerary monument at Saqqara. A carefal 
Survey has found no evidence of a third enclosure 10 the east of the Gist eMudir 
(Mathieson and Tavares 1993:27, contra Studclmann 1985-304, a. 28) despite he 
suggestive serial photographs of thc area (Capart 1930: pl. XIV), 

“To dale, he most intensive investigation has been carried out on the Gisr el-Mudir 
(Tavares 1995 Although no structure has yet been located with certainty inside the Gîisr 
el-Madir, fragments of limestone, red quartzite, pink granite and black basalt are strewn 
over a considerable area in the north-west comer, suggesting that a building may have 
ıexisted ia this part of the enclosure (Mathieson and Tavares 1993.29-30), Both faces of 
he west wall are visible, permiting an analysis of the construction technique. The walls 
seem to have been built with a rubble coee, but the comers ‘show solid masonry 
Construction” (Mathieson and Tavares 1993-30). Archive photographs hon investigations 
by lhe Egyptian Antiquities Organisation show a construction techniqwe reminiseent of 
Third Dymusty step pyramids, namely ‘masonry is wo tiers wih courses sloping 


inwards’ (Mathieson and Tavares 1993:29), However, potery beerjars found in the 
ofthe south-west comer of the enclosure have been provisionally dated to the end of he 
Secondlbeginning of ihe Third Dynasty, apparently confirming the carly date of the 
monument (Beles r al 1995:34). The excavators coamment that ‘a full iavestigatioa of 
he comers and any posslele foundation deposits associated with them may yet prove to 
be ihe only way to date more closely the Gir el-Mudir” (Beles et al 1995:3). None he 
less, the apparent absence of any central structure distinguishes the enclosure from the 
nenby step pyramid complexes OF Nejerkhet and Sekshemkhet I sens more likely that 
he Gist elMudir represents an intermediate stage between the mudbriek funecary 
encloures of Abydos and the stone ep pyramid complexes of the Third Dynasty. The 
use of stone is ceainly eruder and more rudimentary than in the Third Dynasty 
monuments (ef. Bedles c1 al 1995: figs 2, 3). A Second Dynasty dale would suit such an 
intermediate ype of funerary monument. Kis tempting to link the Gisr Mudir 1o one of 
he Second Dynasty royal lambs in the vielaity: and Ninetjer, as probably the loagest 
reigning king of the dynasty buried at Saqqara, must be a stung candidate for the builder 
Of such an impressive enclosure (cf. Sudelmans 1985). However, ir should be 
acknowledged that there are problems with this hypothesis. The enormous size of he 
Enclosure seems 1o argue aguiast a Second Dynsty date; and, despite the greater 
availability of stone at Saqqara, some scholars consider i illogical that a stone enclosure 
Should predate the mudbriek enclosures of Peribsen and Khasekhemwy at Abydos 
(Hendricks, personal canmmnunication) 


Abydos 


TOMAS 


Kings Peribsen and Khasekhemmwy at the end of the Second Dynasty chose to be buried 
amongst their First Dynasty focebears, in the ancestral royal cemetery on the ran el- 
Qaab, The reason behind the setum to Abydos cannot be ascertained, Though intemal 
poliies amay have played a purt (Kemp 196730; Stadelmann 1985-295). Judging by he 
Published peivate and soyal tombs at Saqqara and Helwan, a move towards a raluced 
series of rooms, entered by means of a shaft, seems charocteristic of the late Second and 
early Third Dynasty in the Memphite area. By contrast, the tombs of Peribsen and 
Khaseliemwy at Abydos appear 10 have been closely modelled oa their First Dynasty 
atecedents s1 he same site (Kaiser 1992:1801 fig. 4b, e, 183; Roth 1903:4): thelr 
general layout comprises a central burial chamber surrounded by store-tooms. 

‘The tomb of Peribsen reverted to the model of the carly First Dynasty (Petrie 1901: pl 
LVI. I is closer in plan to the tombs of Djer and Dict than to the tombs of Den and 
Qua, showing a series of small cells surrcunding the burial chamber, separıted by cost 
walls. A new feature, however, is a continuous passage surrounding the whole tomb, 
perhaps designed to safeguard against tomb robbers entering fiom the side (Petit 
o1: 

The tomb of Khasekhemwy is quite different from all the others oa the Ummm el-Qaab. 
Ils curious, eloagated form represents a subsequent extension of the original plan (Kaiser 
1902.183; Giddy 1997: 28). Much of it was built from newly made bricks which 
subsequently collapsed. A positive outcome of this poor construction was that he 


Bary drastic Haye 212 


collapsed walls preserved a lage number of the original grave goods with which he 
tomb was furnished. As a result, the tomb of Khasekhenmey yielded a» more 
sepeeseauative selecticn of artefacts than the other royal tombs on the Unum el-Qanb 
(Perie 1901:12). A unique feuture is the stone-built burial chamber, fashioned fromm 
carefully dressed bioeks of limestone (Petrie 1901:13). 


FUNERARY ENCLOSURES 


Periben and Khasekhemwy followed the practice of their First Dynasty predecessors, not 
only in the choice of location and general layout of heir tombs, bur also in constnucting 
separate funerary enclosures of mudbrick on the low desert opposite the town of Abydos 
(Kemp 1966; Kaiser 1969). Unlike the First Dynasly enclosures, hose of the late Second 
Dynasty are nor surrounded by lines of subsidiary tonıbs (Lauer 1988-5). 

The enclosure of Khasekhemwry, known by its Arabic nickname Shunet e2-Zebib 
“(irerally, “Storehouse of Raisins’), is the most prominent ancient building in the northern 
part of Abydos (Kenmp 189:534, 56 fig. 18A). is massive mudbciek walls sill stand to 
û gseat height, testament 1o the strength and solidity of its construction. Until the recent 
fecivestigation of the Shunet ez-Zebib, the interiors of the Early Dynastic funerary 
enclosures ‘remained generally mysterious and unknown” (O Coanor 1991:7). The 
Pennsylvania. Yale Expediioa was successful in uneovecing a large expanse OF the 
original Second Dynasty mıudplaster tloor loside the Shunct ez-Zebîb. More interesting, « 
ine of angled bricks was all that remained of a destroyed feature la he cemre of the 
enclosure (O'Connor 1991: 9-10, figs 6-7), The angle of the brickwork is suggestive and 
he excavators seconsiruet the feature as “a large mound mıde Of sand and gravel. 
covered with a brick skin, of which this brickwork is the lowest and oaly surviving piece 
{O'Connor 1991:7). Sueh a mound would have been hidden from general vier by he 
high walls of the enclosure, but immediately visible on entering the building (O'Connor 
1991:4). If this reconstruction is correct the similarities between the enclosure and the 
Step Pyramid complex of Nejerithet become all he more striking (et. O'Coanor 
1991:10, fig. 8) Indeed, in its earliest phase, when the tomb was covered by a simple 
mastaba (Mi), the Nejerikhet complex was simply “a larger-scale stone copy of he 
Khusekhemwy complex’ (O'Connor 1991:4) No feature comparable to the proposed 
brikceovered mound has Yet been found insile any other funerary enclosure at Abydos. 
The funerary character of the enclosures, and theif place at the head of a long tradition of 
soyal mortuary architecture, is emphasised by the discovery of a fleet of funerary bouts, 
buried in speclal boat grave» alongside the Shunct ez-Zehib (see below) 


Hierakoapolis 


Khasekhemwy built another massive mudbcick enclosure, very similar îa size and 
architecture to the Shunet ez-Zebib, on the edge of the Great Wadi at Hierakonpolis 
(Clarke, in Quibell and Green 1902-19-20: Alexanian n.&,, 1998). Nicknamed ‘te Fort 
(because of its mıssive construeion), the monument stil stands as a prominent lapdnark 
i the area. Decoratad ffsgments of pink granite selief, bearing the king's serekl, were 
found in and around he entrance to the monument (Lansing 1935-4, fg. 11). The 
decorative scheme puls particular emphasis oa the king, and shows hin engaged in ritual 


activities, This suggests that ‘lhe Fort’ was perhaps built as an arena for the celebration 
andlor cummemcatien of the royal cul (Alexanian 1998), More speeitically, the Fort” 
and its counterparts at Abydos have been interpreted as models of he r za building 
which served as an arena for the celebrısion of ritual festivals (Amold 1994.94, 256-7 
There is no indication that Khusekhermuy ever prepared a tomb for himself ai 
Hierakonpalis (contra Dodson 1996:26), and it remains a mystery why he should have 
erected Wo funerary enelosures, oc ar Abydos and one at Hierakonpolis, He clearly felt 
a special attachment 10 the later site, to judge from the number of monuments and 
arnefacts found there which bear his name. 


Third dast 


The kings of the Third Dynasty amade a decisive break with the past, abundoning the 
ancient royal burial ground of Abydos in favour of the Memphite necropolis. Fron the 
reign of Neyjerkhet until the collapse of the Old Kingdom, all royal mortuary complexes 
Were located along Ihe edge of the westem desert bolering the Nile valley i the vietnity 
ofthe capital. The Step Pyramid of Nejerikhet is the most complete and most impressive 
mortuary coaplex of the Third Dynasty. His successor, Sekhemkhet, began an equally 
ambious monument nearby, but died leaving ir unfinished. Another unfinished step 
pyramid, dled by its architecture and construction technique to the Third Dynasty, is the 
layer pyramid’ at Zawiyet el-Aryan, between Giza nd Abusir It has bec attributed to 
Kaba oa ihe basis of ieseribed stone bowls found in a nearby tomb. The mortuary 
complex, of Sanakht has not been securely identifed, though he so-called ‘brick 
pyramid" at Abu Rawash (on the northers edge of the Memphite necropolis) has been 
suggested as a possible candidate (Dodson 1996:30). The pyramid presumed to have been 
built by fhe last King of the Third Dynasty, Huni, lies far 0 dhe south of his predecessors 
monuments, at the she of Maidum near he entrance to the Fayum. Begun as a step 
pyramid, it was converted into a tue pyramid at he beginning of the Fourth Dynasty. 
hus ushering in the distinctive royal mortuary architecture of he Old Kingdon 


"The Step Pyramid complex of Nerjerikhet 


Ruther than beng a sudden and drmatic innovation, the Step Pyramid complex is more 
easily understeod as the culminatioa of a long tradition of funerary monuments (Kaiser 
1969:6). Feanures which remained constant fiom the reign of Djer in he early First 
Dynasty include a large enclosed rectangular courtyard with perhaps one permanent 
building and other lemporary structures of wood posts and mating (Kaiser 1969:16), is 
just such lighrweight structures taut are seplicated is the Step Pyramid complex, but this 
time in stone, built for eternity. The amalgamation of tomb and funerary enclosure 
repeeseats The most important lanovation of Netjerikhet's complex (Kaiser 1969:16). The 
Abydos tradition of royal mortuary complexes seams lo have had a greater infiuence on 
ihe architecture of he Step Pyramid complex han the design of the nearby Second 
Dymasty royal Iombs (Kaiser 1992188-9), although the infiucnee of the Memphite 
araditioa is difficult to gauge without a mote accurate knowledge of the monuments 
concemed. The plan of the Step Pyramid's subterranean galleries_ which radiate out 
from each side OF the burial chataber and thus surround it weas followed in subsequent 


Barly drastic Haymt 214 


Third Dynasty step pyramids: both Sekhemkhet's step pyramid and the step pyramid at 
Zawîyet el-Aryan have corridors of store-rooms which brunch off ihe mai axis before 
e burial ckanıber and encircle it on three sides (Roth 190344; for plans of both 
ssubstruetures, see Lauer 1962210, ig. 58). The Step Pyramid complex is just lane a 
combination Of many distinct elements (Lauer 1962: pl. 13), each of which must have had 
its own symbolism and significance. The lack of contemporary figured or written 
evidence ‘confronts us with a major problem of interpretation” {Kemp 1989:55); we 
depend upon earlier and later parallels, especially the funerary enclosures at Abydos, and 
upon later wrien sources suc as the Pyramid Texts, 


THE COMPONENTS OF THE COMPLEX 


The complex comprises uo principal types of structure: largely dummy buildings, and 
buildings with ‘woking’ ioteriors. The difference between the two types of building may 
seflect either a caronalogieal or a functional distinction (Kaiser 1969 and Lauer 1988, 
fespectively]. 1f the latter, ihe dummy buildings may have been intended as peirmarily 
symbolic, whereas the functional buildings may have been designed for the funeral 
Ceremonies and for the celebration of the King’s mortuary cult 

‘The ınost prominent feature of the erie complex is the Step Pyramid which covers 
he burial chamber in the cenwe of the enclosure. Initially. howeve, the toma was 
covered by a simple amustaba (Mı). This preliminary stage has been atiibuted to 
Netjerikher's presumed predecessor, Sanakht (Lauer 1957-164); this theory is now 
disproved by the recent discoveries at Abydos which confirm that Neerkhet suceeded 
Khısekhenmwy as King. Outside the limits of the mastaba, 1o the east, lay the galleries 
whieh seem 10 have been lotended for the burial of other members of the royal family. 
The change fom a mastaba superstructure 10 a step pyramid represented 4 complete 
ıchmnge of plan. Construction in horizontal layers of stone was replaced by angled courses 
of masonry for grenter stability, directing the stress inwards towards the centre of he 
monument This building technique became the standard one for Third Dynasty step 
pyramids. AL first, a pyramid of four steps (P,) was built over and around he original 
mastaba, Subsequently, in a thinl msjoc change of plan, tbe pyramid was enlarged 1o the 
nonin and west, and converted into a six stepped consınuction (P,) (Lauer 198&6-1). The 
ısubstucture of the Step Pyramid combines wo different elements: galleries approche 
fiom above via shafts, and rooms approached fromm he end via a staircase of sloping 
ıeorridor (Fin and Quibell 1935, 11: pl. 23; Laver 1962: pl 140) These may have drawra 
upon two different tradidons, exemplified in he First and Second Dynasty royal tombs at 
Saqqara and Abydos respectively (Kaiser 1992:176-85), 

Like the pyramid, he entrınce colonnade seems t0 have been built in stages. The 
scariest section seems to be the small shrine with a niche façade 1o the south of fhe main 
coreidor, I has been suggested that he statue base of Nejerîkhet bearing the name and 
stiles of oholep, discovered south of the southem enclosure wal, was originally 
dedicated in this shrine (Helek 1972.97). The shrine may be compared with the small 
building immediately inside the gateway of the Shunet ez-Zebîb and the corresponding 
building inside Peribsen's funerary enclosure (Kaiser 1969.9). A theory based upon laler 
religious rials holds that the shrine was the building in which kingship was passed 1o 


he next ruler by his deceased predecessor (or the assembly of royal ancestors) manifest 
asa white bıbooa, the 4_w (Pelek 197297) 

The ‘Great Court” which extends in front of the pyramid to the south seems likely to 
have replicated a standard element in the Egyptian royal palace: a formal sening for the 
"appearance of the king' in which he might take part in important ceremonies, such as the 
reception of tribute (Kemp 1989:57-9, A platfoem at the noche end of the count, 
against the base of the Step Pyramid (Kemp I98-58, fig 19۸), may represent he 
Elevated dais where the king would appear enthroned on the occasion of his ritual 
appearances and to review the prisoners and booty ftom foreign campaigns, as depicted, 
for example, on the Narmer mscebea. 

"A second, smaller courtyard eccupies the eastern side of the complex. Dummy shrines 
line both sides of he cour, and s temple (rammed ‘Temple T') lies 1o the west The key 10 
understanding this element of the complex is a throne platform with a double staircase in 
he south of he court. Depicted in First Dynasty inseriptions and ter temple relics, such 
a plafoem was inimutely associated with the Sed-festival. Indeed, it became the 
hieroglyphic determinative or the expression hb-sl, “Sed-festival'. This lestival has been 
discussed in Chapter 6 Cleary, Ihe second or ‘Sed-festival court” was designed for he 
eternal celebration of this pew-eminent festival of kingship (Kemp 1989-61-2) It is 
‘unlikely that t was ever used for a real Sed-festival during the King's lifetime (ef. Laver 
988:10) since most of the buildings are dummy constructons, fled wit nubble. 

One of the least understood elements of the complex is ihe second, ministure tomb 
built within the southem enclosure wall (Kemp 1989-55). Designated the “South Tomb, 
here is no general evasensus on its purpose o¢ symbolism. Parallels have been drawn 
between the Souda Tom and the smal satelite pyramids associated with Old Kingdom 
soyal tombs (Laver 1968.98; Lehner and Lacovara 1985-174) The most plausible 
explanation is that he South Tomb housed the King's katate (H.Altenmûller 1972.3) 
Ceainly, he ‘burial ckanıber beneath the South Tommb is too small o have contained & 
coflin of normal proportions. A survey of royal burials from the Early Dynastic period 10 
he New Kingdom suggests that Iwo separate chambers one for the King's body, the 
other for his ka_was the usual arrangement (H.ANenmûller 1972:5-6). Support lor this 
hypothesis may be provided by a dismantled canopy-frame found in association with the 
salellle pyramid of Khali at Giza, I may be cormpared with the wooden bier <found in 
fhe T-shaped magazine of he south side of the entrance corridor of Netjerikhet's South 
Tomb (Lehner and Lacovara 1985:1740. 

‘Tuo of the most enigmatic parts of the Step Pyramid complex seem to have been 
incorporated into the final design at a relatively late stage: the North Court ad the s0. 
called ‘Westem Massif, The precise purpose of the North Cour is dificult 1o establish, as 
much of it was left unfinished (11.Aeamller 1972:7). One scholar has suggested that 
the North Court was probably not intended as an open court a all, but rather as a spoil 
damp for the adjacent constnuctioas, levelled to form a platform (Lauer 1946-186) 
Because it belongs to a Inter phase in the development of the complex, parallels for its 
distinctive feunures have been sought, perhaps misguidedly, in the royal mortuary 
complexes of the Old Kingdom, rather than in those of the First and Second Dynasties 
The song connection beeen the royal mocuary cult and the solar cult in the Fi 
Dynasty, and the suggestive location of Userkafs pyramid and mortuary temple next 10 
she Norih Court, is hought by somme to be significant for the imerpretation of this element 


Early drastic Haye 216 


ofthe Step Pyramid complex (H.Aenmûller 19728-9). In particular, the large platfoem 
i he North Coun has been iotecpreted as an eacly solar platform (H1 Ateamller 1972; 

Brinks 1979), However, this hypothesis has been firmly rejected by other scholars (for 
example, Stadelmann 1983-375). More plausibly, the platform may have been a large 
ıaltar for the presentation of offerings (Stadelmann 1983375-6, Lauer 1984:8). may be 
ho coincidence that subterranean slore-qwoms nearby were found t0 contain supplies of 
grain and fruit which might hve been intended as offerings. In addition, two rows of 
Poocly built dummy granaries stood close 10 the northen enelosure wall. Though 
‘absurdly narrow for wocking granaeies (Fins and Quîbell 1935,177), hey may have 
been symbolically connecied wil the North Court platform. A series of galleries benca 
ıe Narth Court poses further peoblems of interpretation. The chambers that wete found 
to be anklezdecp in dried fruit and gra (Firth aad Quibell 1935, 1: v) also yielded seal 

impressions of Khusekhenmwy and Netjerikhet (Firth and Quibell 1935,1141, gs 22, 10 
I respectively). A sealing of Sanakht is mentioned as coming fron the sume Iocation 
(Firah and Quibell 1935, 1: 8), but this may be a mistake since no further discussion or 
îlusirton of the sealing appears. The galleries were divided ia two by a small blocking 
wall and it was on the face Of this wall that the seal-ieıpressioas were discovered. Aecess 
o tke galleries was via two shafis (Lauer 1936-184, 1g. 208). The galleries have no direct 
ıselatîon with the magazines bul over therm during the last, unfinished phase of the Step 
Pyramid complex. They could easily have belonged to un carlier (Second Dynasty, 
unfînished gallery tomb (S1adelenaan 1985-303) A further se¢ of subterranean galleries ih 
he north-west quarter of the North Court comprises four parallel descending corridos 
whieh give access to a long, transverse gallery, of which open further chumbees (Lauer 
TO36:186). The complex may represent anodacr abandoned tomb of the Second Dynasty. 
Here Mariette ound a travertine offeringtable, decorted with ions" heads (Cairo 
Museum Catalogue Ginénule 1322) although the galleries are unlikely to have been the 
object's original Jocation. I may kave been moved from a nearby temple or offering: 
place (Firth and Quibell 1935, 1: 77) The quality of wockranship suggests that it may 
have stood in a foyal mortuary temple (Stadelmann 198:303), strengthening the case r 
ihe exisenee of Second Dynasty soyal tombs in the vicinity. The mudbrick remains found 
under he Westen Massif may have been part of such a mortuary temple (Studelmmunn 
TS8S:303). la addiion 1o these two sets of underground chambers, he North Court 
contains three unfinished stairway tonibs of the Third Dynasty which were probably 
begun before the extension of the Step Pyramid complex norihwands, then abandoned 
ıafler the incorporation of the North Cour (Firth and Quibell 1935,177). 

‘As ils name suggests, The Western Massif cceupies almost the entre westem side of 
he Step Pyramid complex. comprises three conjoined sections, wo ower fattopped 
ısaruetures (I and I) and a central, arched section (I). With its distinctive supersinucture 
and underground galeries (Laver 1936:182, 1g. 206, 1962: pl, 14b), the Western Massif 
seems to Onn a single, planned building, carlicr than the Sep Pyramid self (Studelmann 
1985:3001) The aitial excavators of the Step Pyramid complex describe the ‘elaborate 
underground galleries” beneath the Westen Masi, with ‘smaller galleries o chambers 
wat right angles, eut in the sofî rock (Fir and Quibell 1935.1217, 71), The similarity to 
mastabu substructures of the Second and Third Dynasties was acted (Firth and Quibell 
1935,171). The entrance to the underground galleries lies 1o the north. From a 
desecnding shal, further, perpendicular shafts lead direclly 10 the main, central gallery: 


Tis, in tum, is tinked to two outer galleries by cross-passages. In plan, therefore, the 
galeries bear a close resemblance to the Hetepsekhenmwy galleries. The burial chamber, 
Î there wras oe, is likely to have lan at the souta-west comer of the monument, now 
inaccessible. Large numbers of stone vessels, apparently uninseribed, were found in the 
galleries, especially the souihem part (Fir and Quibell 1935, 1: 17). The dangerous 
Condition of he galleries may have prevented heir full exploration (Stadelmann 
1985.302). is, perhaps, surpcising that no sealimpressions were found in the galleries. 
This could be due 1o their incomplete exploration, buf it is also noteworthy that only & 
few sealings of Nejerihet were found in the galleries beneath the Step Pyramid 
(Stadelmann 1985302). 1t is tempting 1o see in the Westem Massif another Second 
Dynasty royal tammb, laier incorporated by Netjerikhet into his grand plan. la the same 
way, he superstruetures of the Hetepsekhenmey and Ninetjer tombs muy wel have been 
‘casualties of Djoser's construction work 1o the north, since any but the most minimal 
superstructure...would have interfered with the construction of his massive enclosure 
wall” The presence of large numbers of stone vessels inscribed for Hetepsekhemwy (17) 
and Nînejer (13) amongst the funerary provisions of the Step Pyramid complex suggests 
hat "Djoser apparently had special access to the possessions of these earlier kings". This 
would be easily explained if Nejerikhet swept away the superstruetures of ther tombs 
and ‘appropriated the contents? (Roth 1993:48, n. 49). (Since the name of Djer occurs on 
13 vessels, ofien associated with a building called umrcn mu, it is posstble that this 
institution, loo, lay in the vicinity and “fell vietim to Djoser's workmen” [Roth 1993:48, 
491) 

‘Examination of the topography in the vicinity of the Step Pyramid complex has lad 
one Egyplologist t0 pos the existence of a 40metre-wide dry most, extending around 
he Step Pyramid complex on all four sides, and doubling back on itself 1 the south 1o 
form the hierogiyp ws 1, ‘bead court” (Swelien 1988). However, only the weste and 
perhaps northem Chumnels can be traced on the ground with any likelihood, and the 
Reory has so far received only limited support (F.D.Friediman 1995-40-1, ig. 25). 


The sep pyramid complex of Sekhemkhet 


‘Sekhenkhet began his own step pyramid complex to the southwest of his predecessor's 
monument (Plute 72) The enclosure measures somme 500 metres by 200 meres and he 
pyramid at is cene was planned sas a sevewstepped structure, in coatrast lo 
Nerjerikhet's six-stepped pyramid. The construction technique shows notable advances in 
stone architecture: {he enclosure wall uses larger blocks which would have given greater 
strength and colesion, as well as allowing economies in the quarrying work; he ne 
Tura limestone for he outer casing was employed more sparingly than in Netjerikhet's 
complex. Like the Netjerikhet complex, Sekbemkhet's step pyramid conmplex seems to 
have becn built in stages. The foundations of an carly southern enclosure wall were 
uncovered, the same distance fiom 


Early drastic Haye 18 


Plate 72 The unfinished step pyramid complex of 
Sekhemkhet at Saqqara (author's 
photograph). 


he pyramid as he northem enclosure wall, Hence, he complex seems originally 1o have 
comprised a rectangle with the step pyrumid at its centre (Lauer 1968.99). The enclosure 
was subsequently enlarged to the noah and south; the southward extension was more 
restricted due to the more difficult serraia, hence the asymmetry of the complex in its 
“final foc (Lauer 1968:90), Due to limited excavation inside the enclosure, ir is unelear 
how many of the other buildings surrounding the pyramid kad been started when work oa 
ihe complex was abandoned (Edwards 1993:62) The substructure of fhe pyramid sens 
to hive been largely completed, even though the monument above ground was 
abandoned at an carly stage. A descending corridor in the north face of he pyramid gives 
access to the burial chumbct, which was roughly hewn tato the bedroek aad surrounded 
on three sides by storage magazines. These number 132 in total and open oF a transverse 
east-west corridor with ans extending southands at both ends (Eûwands 1993:61). The 
stone sarcophagus discovered in the burial chunıber was intact, but coatained no body, 
probably indicsting thur it was unacceptable to bury a king in an unfinished pyramid. 
acidentally, it is the earliest royal stone sarcophagus from Egypt (Edwards 1993:62). 

"One element that was finished is the Soul Tomb. Located closer to he pyramid than 
in the complex of Netjerikhet (Laver 1968), the Soul Tomb seas part of the original plan, 
and seems 1o have been covered by a smal mastaba measuring 6Û by 30 cubits (32 by 16 
metres) (Lauer 1968-100). 


yer pyramid’ at Zawiyet el-Ayan 


Te 


Another, unfinished step pyramid dated to he Third Dynasty is the socalled ‘layer 
pyramid’ at Zaviyet el-Aryan (Dunbm 1978: xi) Only the lowest courses of he 


pyramid's inner core have been preserved, and even the substructure seems to have been 
Toft unfinished. The ‘layer pyramid seems 10 have been planned as a monurment of six 0¢ 
seven steps, but work was clearly abandoned at an carly stage, judging by the total 
absence of any funerary equipment (Edwards 1993,65). The silanes between the 
Zawiyet el-Aıyan pyramid and Sekberkhet's monument ane striking, both in the foemı of 
the superstructure and in the overall plan of the subterranean chanibers. A date close 1o 
ıhe reign of Sekhemkhet seems certain for the ‘layer pyramid (Edwards 1993.64). 


The pyramid at Majdum 


Considerable uncertainty surrounds the precise date of the pyramid at Maidum, Hs initial 
stages have genccally been aliibuted 1o Hun, last King of the Thind Dynasty (of 
example, Wildung 19694: 135), even though no inscription from the site bears his name, 
New Kingdom graft inside the pyramid irself show that Egyptians of later periods 
believed Snefen to have been the builder of the monument (there is no doubt thal 
Snefena was responsible for the pyramid in its final form) and he fact that several of 
Snefenu's relives are buried in neatby mastabas may lend weight to this theory 
(Edwards 1993.95). The choiee of keaton is unusual, Maidun lying a considerable 
distance ftom the Memphite necropolis which had served Huni's Third Dynasty 
forebears, The proximity of he Seila pyrumid, dated to the early part of Sneferu's reign, 
may indicate that the Maidum pyramid was also built by this king (Seidlınayer 19966: 
206 However two pyramids are already known to have been built for Snefen at 
Dahshur, and it is perhaps unlikely, although not impossible (Edlwrarls 1993-95-7), that 
he could have completed three mastive funerary monuments within 1 single eign. Huni 
jis alloted a reign of identical length (tweaty-four years) by ihe Turin Canon, and would 
have had ample opportunity to construct sn impressive mortuary complex. The fact that 
he tomb of Mejen, a hig official under Huni, vras located at Saqqara has suggested 1o 
some hat the tomb of the king hinself lay nearby, However, the tombs of oftictals seen 
to have been located at Saqqara throughout the Early Dynastic period, irrespective of 
chnges ia the location of he soyal tomb (Roth 1993:50). In the absence of a more 
plausible candidate _and recent excavations have decisively rejseted the Gisr el-Mudir 
Enclovure at Saqqars as an unfinished step pyramid complex of the Third Dynasty 
(Mathieson and Tavares 1993; Beles er al 1995)_the pyramid at Maidum, in is initial 
form, may have been iatended as Huni's funerary monument 

Like its predesessors at Saqqara and Zawiyet el-Aryan, the Maidum pyramid was 
originally planned ss a seven-stepped monument. l a secoad building phase, the pyramid 
was enlarged to an cight-stepped monument (Petrie 1910; Edwards 1903:72). A more 
dramatic change of plan converted the siep pyramid imo a true pyramid, and it is this 
innovatioa, inked with fundamental changes in the Egyptian conception of the afterlife, 

vat has been atributed to Snefern, first king of the Fourth Drmasty. The courses of 
masonry used in the Iwo phases of the step pyramid slope inwards tovrards the centre of 
he monument, a technique coramon 10 sll Third Dynasty pyramids (aad also shared by 
the lower half of Snefer's ‘Bent Pyramid at Dahshur) By contrast, he conversion to « 
we pyramid used horizontal courses, characteristic of Fourth Dynasty pyramid huilding 
(and used in the upper part of the Bent Pyramid’ and throughout Sneferu's northern 
pyramid at Dahshur Aecess to the burial chamber, located near ground level beneath the 


arly drastic Haye 2 


cene of he pyramid, was vis a descending corridor leading from an opening in he 
pyramid's north fee. At The end of the corridor, 4 vertical shafî connected with the burial 
Chamber iself (Edwards 1993:75). No trace Of a sarcophagus was found by the first 
archaeologist to enter the pyramid in moder times, but he monument is likely to have 
been robbed in antiquity. 

An open causeway led from the pyramid to the valley temple. Due to its location 
beneath the moder water-able, this part of the complex has not been excavated. By 
contrast, 1he mortuary temple ca the cast side of the pyramid is wel preserved. It is 
entirely devoid of decoction, and the lowest courses of masonry were left undressed, 
sugsesting that the temple ras never finished. Two uninseribed, round-1opped stele, 
presumably intended ss funerary stelae, were found inside (Edwanls 1903 76-7). The 
Toeation of he mortuary temple, 1o the east of the pyramid, contrasts with earlier Thin 
Dynasty prıclice__Nejerikhet's mortuary temple lies to the north of his Step Pyramid 
and may indicate that belongs to he Hest building phase at Maidum, when the step 
pyramid was convened to a tre pyramid. 


THE CHANGING SYMBOLISM OF ROYAL MORTUARY 
ARCHITECTURE 


The form of the royal mortuary complex, its architecture and constiweat components 
provide the best guide available 1o conceptions of the afterlife in the Early Dynastic 
Period (ef. Edwards 193:278), The royal iomb was not simply the repository and final 
resting place for he body of the King. K was also the means by which the King could 
participate in the afierlite. The om conplex provided bod He necessary material goods 
for the elemal sustenance of the soyal Kathe commodities and other grave goods 
interred with the King_and, just as importantly, he architectural symbolism to crete and 
foster the right conditions for his rebirth and life in the hereafter. A detailed examination 
of royal rmortuary architecture over the course of the firs three dynasties reveals the rich 
symbolic vocabulary with which it was imbued. Through the prominence of different 
Symbolic elements over time, we can chart the course of afierlite beliefs during the Early 
Dynastic period. Tuo symbols emerge as preeminent the primeval mound and the 
replica royal palace. Ech points to a diffesent aspect of royal mortuary ideology. 

AS we hve seen, the superstructures of the royal 1ombs at Abydos have been 
reconstructed a simple mounds of sand, held îs place by a mudbriek sevetment. The 
symbol of the mound seems to have bern s0 ioıportant that a second, hidden sumulus 
Covering the burial chamber became a regular festure of soyal tomb architecture. N seems 
ikely that the form of the burial mounds reealled symbolically the primeval mound 
whieh first emerged from the floodwaters of chaos at the time of creation (cf. Hadavy 
1956:1833), The primeval mound was, in laler periods a least, a powerful symbol of 
rebin and resurrection. ls iacorportion ino the royal ton stems t0 indicate that the 
reurrectioa of the dead king was a primary objective, and one whieh could be assisted 
magically hy he very architecture of he tomb. In the case of fhe Third Dynasty step 
pyramids, the symbolism may have bee more complex than merely a stepped version of 
e peimeval mound (see below). 


From late Predynastie times, concepts of the royal afterlife seem to have given a 
prominent role to the palace. The arehitecture of tomb U-j at Abydos (hating to he late 
Predynastic period, Naqada Illa2, ¢. 3150 BC) seems to mimic the layout of the royal 
palace, with interconnecting chambers. The syrabolism becomes more explicit from the 
feign OF Djcr onwards, vlhen the king's tomb oa The Unum el-Qanb was accompanied by 1 
separate funerary enclosure oa the low desert Judging fromm the Step Pyramid complex of 
Netjerikhet, the purpose of the enclosure was to provide an arena tn which the ritwals of 
kingship could be played our foc all ctemity. That a replica royal palace was considered 

‘essential element of the royal mortuary camplex has important implications for Early 
Dynastic conceptions of the afterlife. The deduction must be that the aflerlife of the king 
was envisaged on one level at leas as a continuation of his earthly existence, In death as 
in life, royal ceremonial was ceairal 1 the function of the King, andl proper provision foe 
its eclebration was a necessity in he planaing of he royal mortuary complex, The royal 
ioanbs of the Second Dyeusty at Saqqara emphasise the tomb as a dwrelling-place for he 
king's ka. The layout of he innermost chambers consciously imines the private 
apartments of a house, and this aspect of the design may have male a separate funerary 
enclosure redundant (although he anonymous enclosures to the west of the Step Pyramid 
complex may dale to the Second Dynasty). 

Cenain other aspects of The royal tombs at Abydos hint at he afterlife beliefs of First 
Dynasty Egyptians. As we have seen, there is 3 gap in the line of subsidiary burials 
surrounding some Of the royal Iombs in each case, fhe gap occurs at the southwest 
Comer, aligned with the prominent cleft in the lifts behind Abydos. Evidence from later 
periods suggests that he cleft was believed to be an entrance to the underworld; if his 
lier was current in Early Dynastic times, Ihe gap is the line of subsidiary burials may 
have been provêded to allow: the ka of the deceased king to travel freely fromm the tonb to 
he underworld. A belief in dhe royal Ka is also suggested by the separate annex 10 he 
southwest of Den's tomb. In the Thid Dynasty step pyramid complexes, this aspect of 
he design is transmuted into he South Tom, a second miniaturised torab to the south of 
the main pyramid. 

The overall orientation of he royal tanh may alo be significant. ln the tomabs of Den 
and his successor Anedjib, the entrance stairwray approaches the burial chamber ftom the 
‘perhaps aligned 1o the rising sun, a powerful symbol of rebirth. The change to a 
norerly orientation in the tomb of Qas foreshadows the tonibs of the Second Dynasty at 
Saqqars and the slep pyramid complexes of the Third Dynasty. la the last the northerly 
orientaion may well be connected wilh the cireumpolar stars, Hdentiîed as the souls of 
dend kings in the Old Kingdom Pyramid Texts. Seen fro the burial cdhumber, the 
entrance corridor in the Third Dynasty step pyramids ‘would resemble a large ramp 
which pointed northwards iowards the cirumpolar stars’, providing the means for the 
king to ascend 1o the ‘astral heaven’ (Edwards 1993.284). It is tempting to speculate that 
the architecture of Qas's tomb hus a similar signi cance, indicating that the belief in an 
ıasteal afterlife for the king wras alrendy cuereat t the end of the First Dynasty. 

‘The frst unequivocal evidence for a celestial aspect 1o royal mortuary Seology may 
be provided by he fect of funerary boats discovered adjacent to-_lierally moored 
alongside the Shunet ezZebib, Tiir date is sill uncefain: the associated pouty 
suggests the boat burials are contemporary with the Shunet itself, but the stratigraphy of 
he site seems to indicate an earlier date, perhaps the fist half of he First Dynasty. 


کی ر را 


'Symbolically, they seen to foreshadow the solar barks buried next to Old Kingdom royal 
pyramids, alihough a more prosaic explanation is also possible: that the boats were used 
to transport the king's body and funerary goods ton The Residence at Memphis. Boat 
burials are anested ia connection with First Dynasty private tombs (at Saqqara, Abu 
Rawash and Helwan), but he boats next to Khasekheny's funerary enclosure provide 
ihe earliest royal parallel for this practice, Their presence next 1o the King s most 
prominent morkuary construction demonstrates their symbolic Importance. As well as 
Snjoying a afterlife modelled oa his earthly activities (for which  seplica royal palace 
was necessary, the King was apparently considered to participate in some way in the 
cosmic cycle. Henceforth, the celestial component of the royal aflerlite__if it may be 
called such_was to become inereasingly ioıportant. By the end of the Third Dynasty, it 
had completely eclipsed earlier concepts OF an afuerlile characterised by royal ceremonial 
“The riunıph of the “eclestial model’ is emphasised in the symbolic architecture of the Old 
Kingdom pyramids, 

The sep pyramid complex of Netjerikhet comprises a multitude of syrabolic clement 
seach of whieh provides a piece of evidence for contemporary concepts of the royal 
afterlife, The contiauing importunce of the replica palace_4o provide an arena for royal 
imal is emphasised by the enclosure wilh ts recessed ‘palace-façade' decortion. The 
identity of ihe various royal riuals which the funerary enclosure was designed 10 
accommodate is hinted at by specific architectural fetures. The three most inipodant 
fimals seem to have becn the appearance of the king on a raised dais, the Sed-festival, 
and he ceremony known as ‘encompassing the field’. Despite this evidence or 
inereasing sophistication in mortuary Ideology, the ancient symbol of he primeval 
mound was retained, ln the earliest phase of he complex, a mastaba covered the King's 
burial chamber, recalling the supersiructutes of the First Dynasty tombs at Abydos and 
heir Second Dynasty successors st Saqqara. 

The change fiom mmastaba to step pyramid is likely to have been motivated, a least in 
part, by Meclogical considerations. As we have seen, he northward orientaiion of he 
entire coaıplex_~a feature which dates back to the end of the First Dynasty probably 
reflects the importance of astral religion. When viewed orm Egypt, he stars surrounding 
he pole-atar are never seen to set. For this reason, the Egyptians called Them ii mmn-sl. 
ihe ones that know not destruction’. was the king's wish to ascend to the cizcumpolar 
stars, and the Pyramid Texts (Unerances 267 and 619 [$365 and 1749]) speak of he 
lng doing s0 by means of a gfeat staircase. The step pyramid muy have been designed as 
just such a staircase, providing the King with a very concrete means of ascending to the 
‘sky. Note hat the determinative of the Egyplian verb... ‘to ascend, resembles a step 
pyramid [Edwards 1993:2811) Although the Pyramid Texts were only writen down in 
he late Fifth and Sixth Dynasties, their language and coatent srongly suggest an carlier 
composition (ef. Edwards 1993284). Therefore, rely inappropriate to use 
them to illuminate royal moauary ideology of the Early Dynastic period I has also been 
‘suggested that fhe step pyeamid represented a repetition of he primeval mound symbol, 
he piling up of mounds, one upon another, intensifying the symbolic assistance in the 
rebirth of he king. 

At he beginning of the Fourth Dynasty, the step pyramid at Maidum wras converted 
into a tue pyramid. This coaversion represents the end of the distinetive tradition of 
Early Dynastic moruary architecture. The purpose of fhe royal funerary monument 1o 


cable the King to aseend to a celestial aferlife—zemaine the same, but the sybolisn 
and underlying ideology had changed dramatically. The design of Early Dynastic royal 
oanb complexes paints a picture of increasing sophistication in soyal mortuary ideology, 
and a growing dominunee of celestial, as opposed to earthly, concepts of the aferlile: 
From simple ideas of rebirth and resurrection, the etemal eclebration of royal ritual came 
to play a central sole, reflecting 3 concept of the aferlife more concemed with the 
continuation of royal power than with the ineoqporation of the king in the great rhythm of 
the universe. As the Early Dynastic period drew 1o a clase, concepts of he royal afterlife 
underwent 4 major transformation: st his death, the king was absoebed into he 
supematural order, relinquishing his guidance of the ship of stale for a place in the 
celestial bark of the supreme deity. 


EXCURSUS: THE ROYAL TOMBS AT ABYDOS: BURIALS OR 
CENOTAPHS? 


"Following Petie's excavations oa the Ura elQaab, he royal tombs of the Fir and late 
Second Dymsty Kings were recognised as the burial places of these rulers. The tombs 
Wilh elt accompanying subsidy burials and pairs of Rumery ielue spoke 
unequivocally of heir secupants” royal tans, Then, i the wo decstes following 1936, 
Bay cuatimed he Eu DYyuatie caueley at North Spgs wilh hs raatalve 
mudbrick mastabas, The impressive size and architecture Of the North Saqqars tommbs lel 
Sebel to question the Lûcifcation Of are sale 1oibs ot the Uo | Gta (Lanet 
T9S7:156). Emery, in panicular, ras hn no doubt thar fhe North Saqqara mastahas were 
ghee burial places of he Firs Dyas king ie inerpreed the tofmbs on the Dram el. 
Quah as southern ‘cenotaphs', ununy Upper Egyptian counlerpans to the “true burials 
in Lower Fey, tellecting Ihe dualiy of Fypuan kingship (Emery 1961). Thus began * 
protracted scholarly dehate over the proper Heprelalion of the Mo cemetery areas, Hae 
men e Oanb and Korth Sagqacs (e1 Hofiuan 1980-2801). Since the dabete foeusel oa 
any of the emucial aspects of early royal moruary archikecture, t is of imterext and 
imparance for he history of Eaypolsgy and is sppeeeiioa of the Early Dynastic 
iol 
he detailed arguments for both sides of the debate have been presented in detal 
selsewfhere (esperlally Lauer 1957 and Stulelouann 1985 ia fuvour oC Saqtara as ine royal 
ial ground, Ken I99, and Kalatt L592 tn favour of Abû, and f tw aot hcettanY 
o rekeurne hem again here. Rect cncavations  Aryûoe have skangikene te cate 
enilylng is she as the Fin Dyrasly soyal necopelis. 1a purieular, Al's tomb 
complex on the Un el-Quab seems t0 have been built somewkat later than mastaba 
SSDS al Nac Suqgern, 0 Judge Ro the ceric CVidctce. The ME beeen he 
wo tomb complexes argues against the notioa Bat the Saqqara monument is he tue 
ural of the King and e Abyûos codnplex merely his southern cenotapl (Dreyer 
TOSO:GS, ef Helck 1984: 384-8). The case for dentibing he tornbs s1 Aêyûos as he 
ave royal burlals is inctensingly convincing. The cormbiaation of uormb anil funerary 
aclatute at Abydos peovides 2 logical aacetiy for he Third Dynasty Step Pyemid 
Complex (Kaiser and Teye 182250) i ie generally accepted ha “he Kings ere 
Buried st Abydos and thar the tonabs st Saqqara were for high oicials or members of the 


Bary drastic tame 24 


soyal family’ (Kemp 1967:23), although one scholar, in a reversal of Emery's argument, 
has deatified the Sagqars tombs as narthens cenotuaphs (Hoffman 1980-287). The belie 
hat fhe true royal burials of the Files and Second Dynasties were located at Sagara, 
hough stendfastly maintained by a few scholars (principally Lauer 1969, 1988; Binks 
1979; Stadelmann 1987), is now firmly ‘a minority vie" {O'Connor 1991:7). 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
CULTS AND SHRINES 


Te Early Dynastic tombs and funerary enclosures at Abydos and Saqqara loudly 
proclaim the concern of the King and his courtiers to provide for themselves in death 
However, supematural assistance and divine intervention were equally necessary in fe: 
Egyptians believed thar the daily hazanls and periodic disasters which faced then could 
be prevented, o¢ at least mitigated, by appenling to the gods This applied just as much to 
ıe king, in his fight against the forces of chaos, as it did to the ordinary peasant farmer, 
ıcancemed foe the health of his crops or the survival of his children. 

The evidence for Early Dynastic cult the pesctices and belief that characterised the 
Eaypians” interaction with the divine sphere _is piecemeal and often dimes 1o 
interpret. Yet, with patience, it ean be deployed to illuminate many aspects of religion in 
e hest three dynasties, The picture 1ha emerges is owe of great complexity and 
remarkable soplhistieatioa. In particular, Egypt's carly Kings seen to have been adept at 
‘using religion for their own eds: to strengthen the bonds which held the country together 
sand to butess he insqinution of kingship iself. 

The buildings in which carly cult was practised ranged from small community shrines 
to substantial, govermment-sponsored tensples. The difference in seale and elaboration 
between stale and peivate places of worship emphasises the division in eaely Egyptian 
society beween the ruling dite and the populace, In religion, as in the other spheres of 
aeivily discussed in preceding chapters, the evidence suggests that the concerns of the 
court were alien rather different fromm those of ts subjects 


curr 


Coneeptlons of gol 


An tempt 1o understand ancient Egyptian theology is a diticult enough task for the 
betterdocumentel periods of dynastic history; for the Early Dynastic period it presents 
huge problems, not least because of the very limited souree material, The names of the 
deities themselves provide valuable evidence for Egyptian conceptions Of the divine, 
‘sxretehing back to the very beginaing of the writen record (Homung 1983-100 Ceri 
deities seem 1o have had particularly stzong local origins; this is sometimes reflected in 
he name of the deity which may be derived directly fon the place whic served as the 
principal cult centte or fiom a local topographical feture (Hommung 1983-72) The 
Slearest example is Nekhbet, ‘she of Nekheb (Elkab)'; the god of Herakleopolis, Hr 
"He who is upon his lake’, is an example of the latter type. 

"Another informative source for Early Dynastic religicus belief is he many personal 
names of he period hat have survîved in sealinge and other inseriptions (ef. Hornung 


Bary drastic teyre 26 


198314). Many of hese names are theophorous (that is, they include the name of a deity 
ıas part of the persoaal name) and they provide some indication about whieh culls were 
popular in the fist three dynasties popular enough, at any rate, 10 be chosen by parens 
hen naming a child Moreover, at least 19 Erly Dynastie names incorporate the word 
nF: ‘god’, teferring to an unspeciîed deity; three female names use the feminine 
Counterpart a rt ‘goddess’ (llomung 1983449). OF course, in any particular 
community, ‘god of “goddess', when unspecifed, wras probably understood as referring 
to he local deity. None he less, we should be carefal of underestimating the 
sophistication of Egyptian theology. seen clear that the general concept of he divine 
Was already well established in the Early Dynastic perio. 


Te embodiment of divine atrîbutes 


In religious ieonography, the animal chosen 1o represent a particular deity or aspect of 
divinity was selected for the qualities (not necessarily beneficial) it enibodied, Thus, he 
great wild cow of he marshes was regarded as an extremely dangerous animal but was 
also recognised o be aggressively protective towards ils offıpeing- I therefore made an 
ideal image of protective ımutermal power, embodied in he early cow goddesses Bat and 
Hatbor. A further idea in Egyptian magic and theology was "Gghting like vith like’ 
Hence, an animal which embodied a particular undesirable characteristic or whose 
behaviour adversely affected humans was chosen as ihe irmage of the deity 10 guard 
against such eventvalties. For example, in the Predynastic period, when bodies were 
buried directly in shallow graves with relatively litle protection, a eotnmnon problem (and 
cause for concem) must have been the digging up of bodies, shortly after burial, by 
jackals aad other wild dogs which lived oa the margins of the eulivaion. As a resul, he 
Jackal was chosen to represent the gods charged wilh peotecting the dead in the 
‘necropolis, Khentiamentiu and Anubis (Pinch, personal communication 1995), 


Depiction of deities 


Ii hus been suggested that Egyptian religion witaessed an evolution during the fit two 
centuries of the third millennium BC, wheceby deities were increasingly represented in 
human foc rahe than as animals o¢ inanimate totems (Homung 1983:10). However, 
the evidence fron the Early Dynastic period seems to indicate a more complex situation, 
wilh theriomoephic (in animal foe), anthropomorphic (in humen form) and ‘mixed 
form’ deities all coexisting in religious iconography. Giods such as Anubis, Maflet and 
Wepurawet were, in the Early Dynastic period, alrays depicted in animal form; Min and 
Pla were worshipped in human form form ihe very beginning of Egyptian history The 
figures of Bat at the op of the Narmer Palette represent an intermediate stage: although 
the heads have he ears aad horns of a cow, the faces are humun. The ‘mixed form” s0 
Characteristic of Egyptian religion whereby the deity was shown with a human body 
and an animal head__is not atested until the carly Second Dynasty (Figure &.1) cise 
stone vessels of Hetepsekherwy und Nebra from the Step Pyramid complex show the 
Carheaded Bastet standing before the king's cartouche (Laenu and Lauer 1959: pl. 11 nos 
57, Se while sealings of Peribsen from later in the dynasty depict the god Ash with an 
animal head (Petrie 1901: pi. XXLIT6Y An undated but 


1 8 3 


Figure 8.1 Depietions of deities. Early examples of 
the anthropomorphic form favoured for 
Egyptian deities in later periods: (1) an 
unidentified ram-headed deity from the 
side of a small, limestone, votive offering 
in the form of a carying-chair; the 
provenance of the object is not known 
(ow in the Kofler-Truniger Collection, 
Luzern) (after Schlögl 1978: pl. 81b}; (2) 
the god Ash, shown on a sealimpression 
of Peribsen from Abydos (after Petrie 
1901: pl. XXIL179);: (3) the goddess 
Bastet, shown on an incised stone vessel 
from the Step Pyramid complex of 
Neterikhet at Saqqara (after Lacau and 
Lauer 1959: pl. 11, no. 51). Not to same 
sene. 


clearly Early Dynastic votive offering in the form of a shrine (Sehlêgl 1978: pls Sat) 
shows two standing Sgures with ‘bird-like heads and ram's homs' (Hornung 183:109) 
in religious texus, deities of ‘mixed foc" are not described unlil very late ta pharaonie 
history Such depictions were clearly an artistic convention, bur may not have been a tue 
sellecion of how the Egyptians really conceived the appearance of thee deities (Pinch, 
personal communicution 1995) Indeed, te determinutive used for the nane of û god ih 
arly Dynastic inseriptians is usually a simplified humun hure (Hocnung 1984:1079 
One theory holds that the artistic convention of animalheaded deities harks back 1o 


ary drastic Haye 28 


Predynastie cutie practices in which priests, wearing animal masks, officiated at 
religious ceremonies. This hypothesis receives some support ftom the Predynastie Two 
Dogs Palete” which seems to show a mun wearing a dog-like mask and tail performing 
fies in the midst ofa hunt. 


Local and national deities 


Alhough most Egyptian gods and goddesses had primary cult centres and are thus 
ostensibly ‘local" deities, some none fhe less appear to have enjoyed universal, national 
importance fron the very beginning of Egyptian history. We may wonder whelhcr gods 
such as Khnum and Thoth were in origin local deities or whether, being universal in 
origin, they subsequently adopted a parieular locality as thee main cult cenwe (ek. 
Hornung 1983-225) The term n ri ‘local god', is attested Rom the Early Dynastic 
period. A Votive statuette of a cloaked anthropomorphic deity in a Swiss private 
collection (Kofier-Truniger Colleetion, Luzers) is entitled by the inseription niu, ‘of 
he city". Yet the sceurrenee of ‘local gods" in the Pyramid Texts (for example, $8914) 
which were a peoduct of he royal courtindicntes that these deities haf a degree of 
national importance (Hornung 1983:73). 

JI is important to distinguish between truly Iocal deities, ike Bastct and Nekhibet, and 
ihe local forms of universal gods such as Horus. The origins of gods like Hors of 
Nekhen, Horus of Letopolis and Horus the Behdette are lost in prehistory. One 
possibilty is that hey repeesent an atternpt by Egype's carly rulers to integrate disparte 
cenes iato a more unified religious amewoek, local forms of a universal god adopting 
the heritage of local deities (Homung 1983-73). Indeed, some have seen he emergence of 
the Egyptian pantheon at he beginning of the Early Dynastic period as resulting fromm he 
fasion ûf disinctive regional traditions, mirroing the process of political unification 
(Raines 1991-96) However, i is striking that the different deities atested at he 
beginning of the histori period occupy differeat niches and perform distinct roles ia the 
overall field of human experience. If a pre-existing plethora of distinctive local deities 
was suecessflly moulded into sophisticated and coherent pantheon, this would 

yesent one of the most outstanding achievements of the Early Dynastic period 4 
eologieal unifcation as impressive as the political unitication of he Two Lands 
Altematîvely, the different deities may not represent separate belicf systems with local of 
regional origins (Quirke 199273). Rather, there may have been a unified religious 
straditioa throughout the Nile valley during the fourth millennium BC, perhups mirrored 
in the archaeological recocd by a unilîed smaterial culture. IF so, this tradition was already 
characterised by a pantheon of deities which together represented the full complexity of 
he Eayptians! iotecaction with ele environment. This hypothesis is succinctly 
summarised by Quitke: 


Despite the local voiozs for various deities, none of the different forms 
plays a role extemal to the pattern found in the pantheon that would be 
recognised throughout the country. Two forces are at work here, the need 
1e mark off a distinctive forms for specifically local worship as an 
expression of the local community, and the continued membership Of 3 


culture, a way of life, common to all living in the Nile Valley... The 
interplay of these forecs produces the range of the Egyptian pantheoi 
{Quiake 199275) 


Cult practice 


Alhough we cannot hope to recover fhe nature of religious ritual, wo particular aspects 
of cult practice are tested in Early Dynastic wrinen sources and a third can be 
demonsteated by the archneologieal record. The first, human sacrifice, may sepeesent a 
survival of peehisiorie practice or aermatively an experiment in absolute power 
Conducted by he first kings of a united Egypt. Although sparsely atested (perhaps 
reflecting its arity, t may none the less have coinued as a feature of cult pesetice right 
down to he Lale Feriod. The second aspect ihe role of divine images, seems 1o have 
been central to Early Dyrastie religion, and was to remain an important component of 
temple rinual throughout Egyptian history. The same is true of the third aspect of cult 
practice, The presentation of votive offerings, In this case, the objects themselves have 
Survived, although ihe forms of worship of wihich they feptesent the mstertal component 
Cannot be reconstructed with say certainty. 


Human sacrifice 


There is a limited amount of evidence to suggest that human serif, in a culkie setting, 
was peactised in the Predynastie period and at 1he very beginning of the Early Dyas 
period (Figure £.2), albeit, perhaps, oa a small scale (cf. Shaw and Nicholson 195:134) 
Î common with other unusual aspects of Early Dynastic religion most notably the 
severence shown for the royal plscenta human sacrifice may have belonged 1o an 
ancient Afican substratunn of Egy pian culture. We have seen ia Chapter 7 that retainer 
saciiîce seems 1o have characterised royal burials of he late Fist Dynasty. As an 
xereise in absolute power, this particular practice was shortlivel anl is not attested in 
Egypt afer the First Dyaasty. The same does not, however, seem lo be true of human 
sachfice ia a culic sphere (contra Hofinan 1980261) As Egypt's early rulers 
formulated sophisticated mechanisms of authority, some older, more blatant practices 
seem to have been replaced; but there is evidence, both archeological and epigraphic, or 
he continuation of rival Killings (Schulman 1988, Rimer 1993:1623). Alhouyh 
interpretation of the sources is by no means straightforward, a possîble distinction may he 
made between the First Dynasty examples, which suggest the killing of humans as 
sacrificial victims offered 1o the gos, and the later oceurrences which seem to involve 
he ceremonial execution of criminals or enemy captives. These latter were apparently 
carried Gut in a sacred serting to invoke the supematural powers in countering the focees 
ıofelhaos (Willems 1990). 

Recent exeavations at he Predypnastie cemetery of Adama have revealed evidence of 
human sacrifice in burials of he Naqada II period. One body showed signs of he throat 
having been eut, followed by decapitstion (Midant-Reynes er al. 1996:15. Ritual human 
sacrifice is depicted on a label of Aha fiom Abydos, and seems to be associated with the 

‘Ashioaingî of an inin! fetish (Petre 1901: pl. ILS). A kneeling figure plunges a shorp 
weapon int the chest of a prisoner whose hands are tial behind his back, observed by 4 


Barly drastic iaymt 0 


standing figure of authority with a long stall. A bov is placed between he assailant and 
he victim 1 cate the bloc A similar scene is depicted on a wooden label of Djer fom 
Saqqara, this time associated with the fashioning and dedication of cultie Iotems (Emery 
1961:50, tz. 21). Since there are no surviving textual references to a ceremony involving 
ısacdifiee of this kind, we cannot be sure of the cotext of the ritual. 

"On the label of Aha, the scene of human sacrifice is associated with the fashioning of a 
‘leon standard and an imıi-ıı esh. Both were representîve of royal authority; the im 
ıt fish was closely associated in later times with Anubis (see below). The xeligious 
ceremony associated vith rial kiling on he Djer label appears to be more 
‘saighrforward, I seems to deplet the formal presentason of cutie objects 10 the King. 
Beneath the sign ws, ‘fashioning’, a line of men parades before he seref of Der 
(representing ihe person of the King), each canying a different “iotem’. These commpeise, 
on the top register, a ladder-ike object (perhaps syribolising the ladet, mentioned in the 
Pyramid Texts, by hich the king ascended to the stars), 3 mumnmlforn figure, a large 
ıcaîsh (uihich calls to mind the writing of Narmer's Horus name), and a pelican. On the 


Figure 82 Human sacrifice. lconographic evidence: 
(1a frmgmentary label of Aha from 
Abydos, showing a bound prisoner being 


sacrificed; an ofticiant plunges a dagger 
into the prisoner's breast, while a bowl 
stands between the two to catch the blood 
(afer Petrie 1901: pl. L6}; (2) a wooden 
label of Djer from Saqqara, with an 
identical scene of prisoner sacrifice shown 
in the top right-hand comer (after Emery 
1961:59, fig. 21). Not to same scale. 


second register figures bring 4 bull standard and a panelled sectangle, perhaps 
epreseting the royal serek. The procession of totenm-bearers on the 1op register is 
followed by a smaller gure carrying a spear 


Divine images 


The principal goal of cult practice was to bridge the win reales of the divîne and the 
human and invoke fhe presence Of the gods on earth in their divine images (Baines 
1991:91; and see also Figure &3). The dedication of divine images and states is well 
anested in Early Dyastie sources, parieularly those daing 10 he Fit and Second 
Dynasties (ef Logan 1990,62). The Egyptian word used to deseribe the action is mt 
Inerally “1o give birth to" and hence “to fashion. However, there is samme debate about the 
precise meaning of the phrase in relation to divine images. Some scholars think that he 
JSeivily thus recorded is the dedication of the image by the King to the god, rather than the 
manufacture of the image (which would not have been carrie out by the king himself, 
ough he would doubtless have commissioned the wort). In dedicating he image; 
possibly by means of the ‘opening of the mouth ceremony’, the king would have given 
Tie 1o the state, and the Word mr may refer to this aspect Of the event Leaving aside the 
precise significance of he verb ms, there is no doubt Hat the commissioning and 
dedication of cult images was a major royal activity in fhe Early Dynastic period 
(F.D.Friedinan 1995:35) In the annals of the Palermo Stone and its associated fragments, 
here are some 21 references to the fashioning of divine images in the first two dynasties 
(Redford 1986.89). Many First Dynasty labels also recon the practice. The ereation of 
elt stames validated the King's own claim 10 divinity by reinforcing his postion as 
theoretical high priest of every cult and his role as intermediary between gods and 
mans. 

The divine images dedicated by Early Dynastic Kings were probably statuettes made 
hom stone or preclous metal. The Coptes colossi and a similar stone statue fon the early 
temple at Hierakonpolis represent he earliest surviving cult images of anthropomorphic 
dives. A number of stone animal sculptures have also survived from the early dynasties, 
and hese are generally assumed to have been cult stares of deities worshipped in animal 
fom. They elude a aveine baboon incised with 1he name of Name (perhaps the 
king who dedicated the irmage) (E Sehott 1960), a fiog of the same muterial {Cooney and 
Simpson 1976), and a limestone hippopotamus (Koefoed-Petersen 1951:4, pl. 1). The 
Sîh Dynasty gold hawk from the temple of Horus at Hicrakonpolis (Quibell and Cîreen 
1902: pl. XLVID indicates that cult states were also made of precious meals. 
Unsurprisingly, fevw have survived from antiquity. Cul stalues were probably housed and 


Barly drastic Haye 2 


anspared in carrying-ehairs (cf Troy 198679-82), Small model carrying-ehaies of 
glazed composiion anû stone have been found in deposits of carly votive offerings 
(Kemp 1989:93, fig. 33); one of these models may represent the carrying<chair as a deity 
in its own right, named (7Jp{ıJu, ‘she of he carrying-clair” (Troy 1986:80). The Seoeplion 
machen shows a number of figures on what appear to be slelges; these may also have 
been divine cult images (Roth 1993:39, n. 23; ef Pinch 1993: pls 10, 21b, 24-5). Similar 
ısledge-boen figures are shown on a block from the Palace of Apries at Memphis which, 
although probably of Late Period dale (coatra Weill 1961-351), has impodant 
iconographic links with Early Dynastic seligion (el. Bietak 1994). Given he general 
conservatism of religious finals, we may assume that cult statues were cared in 
procession, and that the appearances of divine 


Figure 83 Divine images. Representations of cult 
images from contemporary Early Dynastic 
sources: (1) female figure on a sledge, 
possibly a divine image, shown on the 
Scorpion macehead (alter Spencer 
1995-56, fig. 36); (2) female figure in a 
carrying shrine, again plausibly identified 
asa divine image, shown on the Narmer 
macehead (after Quibell 1900: pl. 
XXVIB); (3) entry from the third register 
ofthe Palermo Stone, referring to a year 
(inthe mid-First Dynasty) as “the year of 
dedicating (an image of the god) Sed" 
(afer Schafer 1902: pl. ). Not to same 
seal. 


images in such circumstances were an important feature of Egyptian cult practice in the 
Early Dyoastie period, as they were in he New Kinga (Ken 1989-185 8. The open 
plan characteristic of Early Dynastic peovincial shrines may be as much proctieal as 
Symbolic, designed o acconmmnodate this particular aspect of cult practice (Rods 1993:30) 


Votive offerings 


From the detailed analysis of Egyptian sources, combined with general observation of 
contemporary and ancient seligious practice, a leading scholar has concluded that 
individuals visting a shrine or temple engage i three Iypes of activity: ‘peayer, sacrifice, 
sand the dediention of votive offerings (Pinch 1903.333). For he Early Dynastic period, 
here is a complete absence of textual information or elaborate depictions of religious 
activity; we therefore remain ignorant about the first two categories of private aelivit 
prayer and saerilice (ou, as we have seen, there is limited evidence foc human saerifee ai 
fiwal occasions attended by the King). We are slightly better ofT when it comes to the 
dedication of votive offerings since, at several siet, the objects themselves have 
survived. It is likely that visitors to shrines would have routinely brought with them 
simple offerings of perishable cormmodities, especially foodstufê. On certain (perhaps 
are?) occasions, however, a visitor would demonstrate paricular piety andlor 
Concer __by doniting an object anne specifically for his purpose. ln the Early Dynastic 
period, as in Iter times, {hese vote offerings were most offen made of glazed 
Somposition, although stone snd pottery examples are known. 

Four sites have yielded large numbers of votive objects which, by their style or 
arehseologieal comet, can be dated 10 the Early Dynastic period: Abydo: 
Hierakonpolis, Elephamine and Tell Ibrahim Awad (see below, under individual site 
hendings, for further information about the archasology of Hese early shines) In 
addition, a fifth, unprovenaneed deposit of early votive material was unearthed by illicit 
digging in tbe 140s or 1950s; it is quite possible that this deposit, 1oo, came fons 
Abydos, although other sles, such as Naqada, have also been proposed (Kemp 1989:79) 
The date Of the material from the fit two shes, Abydos and Hierakonpolis, is sill the 
subject of some controversy (Kemp 1968-153). In particular, the excavation of the 
Fierakonpolis ‘Main Deposit’ was carried out without detailed recoding. s0 that the 
precise arehaeological context of the finds cannot now be established (B.A dams 1977) 
By, coneast, the Sulet temple at Elephantine and the shrine st Tell Torhim Awad have 
boll been excavated in modem times, providing reliable stratigraphic evidence for he 
date of the votive malerial (Dreyer I986: van Haarlens 1995, 1996. This in tum provides 
ıan important reference point against which 1o date comparable objects fromm Abydos and 
Fierakonpolis. Hence, although some questions remain an Early Dynastic date for most 
ofthe material can be accepted wih some eoafidenee, 

1n iis general character, the votive materîal fiom the four shes is substantially similar. 
Most of the objects are made of glazed consposiion and depict animal or human figures. 
Natural pebbles and Int nodules, many in suggestive shape, also occur (Petrie 1902: pI. 
IX.195-6), whilst stone and ivory figurines are also sepeesented at all four sites, 
However, within this broad hommogeneky, 4 few notible distinctioas emerge vaich may 
be atributable 10 local customs or preferences, Hence, a distinctive feature of the votive 
material front Hierakoapolis is the fteqvency of scorpions and scorpion tails, modelled in 
faience or stone (Kemp 1989:75 Two stone vases, also Rom the Main Deposit, were 
decorated with scorpisas in raise relief (Quibell 1900: pls XVII, XXXII top ef, pls 
XIX, XX.) By eoatrast, scorpion figurines were not found at Abydos or Elephuntine 
sand hve not been reported Roms Tell Jeeahim Awad It is tempting to make a eannectioa 
‘will the late Predynastic king whose ceremonial macebead was found in the samme deposit 
wat Hierakoapolis and whose name is read as ‘Scorpion. However, t is perhaps saler to 


Barly drastic taymt 


wanribute Ihe preponderance of scorpion images at Hierakonpolis to an aspeet of the local 
Cll This particular local allegiance may have been acknowledged in the name chosen by 
ıa local ruler. At Elephantine, a common type of votive offering is a small, oval faience 
plaque, with the head of an animal (apparently a hedgehog) nmolelled at one end (Kemp 
Î980:13, fig. 24.1). Foayaone examples of this strange object were recovered fiom the 
Satet shine, but the ype is not tested at Abydos oF Hierakonpolis (although an object 
ftom Abydos described as a ‘rough mud doll” may be a crude hedgehog plaque [Petrie 
T0228, pl, XILAS) Recent excavations sat Tell Torshiat Awad have yielded a few 
examples of ‘hedgehog plaques, but ot in he numbers in whieh they coeur at 
Elephuatine. They may therefore represent a local tradition of worship (although the 
original purpose of These enigmatic objects is lost in the mists of time), The votive 
material from the carly shrines st Hierakonpolis and Elephantine thus hints at Iscal or 
regional traditions of belief. This is an aspect of Egyptian culture which is difficult 19 
establish n the face of the overwhelming evidence fron a eourt-inspired great tradition 
None the les, it appears ta be an important feature of early civilisation in the Nile valley, 
manifest in other classes of small object sue as stamp-seals and also in the architecture 
oflocal shrines (Kenmp 1989.6583, 9-91). 

OF course, “a votive offering is iot simply an artefact, i is he surviving part of an act 
of worship” (Pinch 193:339). Rituals were probably performed ‘1o lak a votive object 
ith ils donor’; and the actual presentation of an offering was, no dou, accompanied by 
prayers and pefhaps other acts of which ao traces have survived, Lille is known or 
Seran about who made votive offerings and hov they were acquired by donors (Pinch 
1993:3268). Ic is dangerous to try and deduce the social status of donors from the quality 
"(or lack of H) of their votive oflerings (Pinch 1993-344). None the less, a key question 
about shrines and temples at all periods of Egyptian history is the degree of access 
enjoyed by members of the general population. Fro the earliest times, state temples are 
likely to have been off limits to all bur temple personnel, the king and his closest 
officials, Already in the temple enclosure at Hierakoapolis, constructed in fhe Second or 
Third Dynasty, we see the arehiteeture of restricted access (see below), To what extent 
smaller shrines were accessible 1o members of a local community reauins a moot point 
Votive offerings are a potentially useful source of information, if it could be establihed 
where they were made and what type of person dedicated them, Unfortunately, these 
questions are difficult 1o resolve. There is no doubt that royal workshops producing high 
quality craft tems existed in Egypt fromm Predynastie times. However, he marked 
separation between stale and private religion, discussed below, makes it unlikely hat he 
Small votive offerings found at shes like Elephanine and Tell Ibrahim Awad (both 
emote fromm the centres of Early Dynastic political power) were manufactured in royal 
workshops. Rather, they were probably produced by skilled eraftamen, either working for 
heir own benefit or attached to the local shrine. Hov they would have been purchased by 
donors, Operating within a barter econotmy, is dificult to envisage (Pinch 1993-328), The 
votive objects from Abydos, Hierakonpolis and Tell Torahim Awad were all found in 
deposits, representing accumulations o material gathered up and buried at periodic 
intervals long after it was initially dedicated. Only at Elephantine were votive offerings 
found fa sil on the floor of he Satet shrine. Whether the donors themselves were able 10 
penetrate ihe inner rooms of the shrine, or whether the offerings were carried there by 
Priests, cannot be established Evidence from the New Kingdon would favour the later 


interpretation, but the situation may well have been different in the Early Dynastic 
period. To summarise, for the early dynasties many questions about he donation of 
votive ofleringsand about private religious observance in generat must remain 
unanswered. We cannot be certaia, but ic is tempting to suggest that Early Dynastic local 
shrines were used by all members of a community, rom he hendman down to he 
lowliest peasant 


"State versus local religion 


As for Egyptian seligien of later period, so cult of the Early Dynastic period must be 
divided imo two categories: state and local, Not until the end of the Old Kingdom were 
local temples systermutically ‘appropriated by the state, to be rebuilt and decorsted in the 
formal style of the court as a way, no doubt, of binding the provinces more securely Io 
ihe King and his government (e Kemp 198965-83). Throughout the Early Dynastic 
period it seems that the religious concems of the court oa the one hand and local 
Somemunities on the other were entirely sepufate, and occasionally opposed Local shrines 
served local communities, acting as foci for personal piety and probably for acis of 
Collective worship a1 times of joy or tial. The Character of coramuniey worship makes it 
ıikely that local shrines would have been aceessible 1o the general public, at least as far a6 
he forecoun By contrast, temples built by and for the state were characterised by their 
exclusivity. This wras emphasised in the architecture, a high enclosure wall restricting 
access to the temple in is entirety. A clear example OF this is he rectangular ences, 
wall built around the temple of Horus at Hierakonpolis, In fom it is similar to royal 
funerary enclosures of ihe Early Dynastic period, and its construction effectively 
rendering the temple ‘oft limits 1o the local populuionmay be connected with he 
programme of royal building work undertaken at Hierakonpolis by Khasekhem(uy) 
Wnilst local cult activity was by ts nature inclusive, state religion (ta which royal culi 
played a large part) relied upon being exclusive (cf Baines 1991-104). 


Personnel 


Litle is known for certain about the personnel involved in Early Dynustie religion, 
national or local. Specific, if obscure, itles such as sf1)m and «m3 are attested from the 
Fist Dynasty (Petrie 1901: pl X2: Emery 195831). 

“The leopard-akin garment wom by the s(ijn-priest has led oe scholar to speculate 
hat this gure was originally a shaman, practising more intuitive, magical iles, before 
he institutonalisatioa of a more ordered religion at the beginning of he First Dynasty 
(Hele 1984d). There may also have been a connection between the <(jnr-priest and the 
godless Seshat, who is oflen depicted wearing fhe same leopard-skin garment 
(Wainwright 1941-37). la ler periods, he (lJ priest officiated at funerals, particularly 
in the ‘opening of the mouth’ ceremony (foc example, Reeves 1990.723), This 
conection, together with the high status of the title s(n in the Early Dynastic period, 
has led to the suggestion that the holder of the office was the king's eldest son and heir, 
second only in rank and authority to the monarch himself (Schmit: 1984:834). Indeed, 
he person responsible for intimate soyal Finuals, the s(0/nı would very likely have been a 
Close member ofthe royal family. 


Barly dynastic iaymt 16 


A specialist class of funerary priest, 2h mw-3h, , is also attested ton the carly First 
Dynasty (Petrie 1900: pl. XVLIIS, 1901: pl, XV.111; Emery 1954:170, fig. 229), 
ısesponsible for maintaining the mortuary cult of the king (and perhaps also of those of 
Senior members of he royal family). The more general designation for poiest, br r. 
first occurs in he reign of Qa at he end ofthe First Dynasty (Emery 1958-31, pl 37.9) 
During the Second Dynasty we meet for the first ime he tile % ZEAMn “lectoe priest 
(Amêlineau 1902-144, pl. XXILS; Lacau and Laver 1959: pl. 14 no. 70). This ia mum 
implies he formulation of theological texts and a role for the writen and spoken word in 
ıcalt practice. la general, however, he role of my and degra in eaely Egyptian religioa 
was probably restricted, ritual being of primacy importance ıa cul celebration. has been 
argued that, prior to the Second Dynasty, the 1f{/nzpries acted as keeper of ritual texts, 
buf that this role was taken over by the newly crested position of ‘leetorcpeiest (elek 
1984d: 106 

"Specialised priesthoods serving the major state cults seen to have emerged at the end 
of he Second and during the Third Dynasties. The tile ur3) Ieraly ‘greatest of 
seers’, held in tuner periods by the High Priest Of Ra at Heliopolis but perkaps originally a 
le relating to astronomical observation, is rst attested in the reis of Khasekhemy 
(Armdlineau 1902-144, pl. XXILSY; it was subsequently held by lnnhotep, chancellor at he 
Court of Negeciahet. The tille held by the Hig Priest of Horus af Letopalis wur, first 
appears at the end of the Third Dynasty (Cioedieke 1966} as does the office ol rp pr- 
f, ‘eonzoller of the Perwer (the national shrine of Upper Egypt)" (Weill 1908-262741. 

A pıofessional priesthood serving local cults is sot atesied until the Fifh Dynasty 
(Homung 1983.226) However, here is evidence fron the Early Dynastic period for he 
(pakime) priests of local culis holding important positions within their communities 
(Seidlmayer 1996: 118). Thus, an individual named Nnıi-hyp, owwmer of a large, cichly 
fumished stairway tonnb of the lale Third Dynasty at Qau (thruntoa 1927: pl. 18), is 
idenilîed as a priest, presumably of the local cult (Seidmayer 1996: 118) Temples 
played an important fole in Iocal and national economies fform an early period, and 1t is 
Tkely hat temple persomel benefited materially, as well as in prestige, from an 
involvement with the local cult 


Royal cult 


The ivory comb of Djet ‘presents concisely and clearly the central tenet binding together 
ancient Egyplian civilisıtion, the notion that the King fulfls a role oa earth under he 
protective wings of the celestial falcon in heaven” (Quirke 1992-21-2). The primary role 
Of the king eas as arbiter between the gods and the people of Egypt. In retur for daily 
oferings and the celebration of heir cult on earth, the gods looked favoursbly on Egypt 
and bestowed on the country their divine blessings. The channel of communication in this 
Mocway peocess as the King. n they, therefore, the King ras the ultimate high priest 
in every temple ia the land: ‘all cult in Egypt was royal cult’ (Quirke 199281). 
Implicidy, all temples were monuments 1o the King as well a cult centres for the deities 
to whom they were explicilly dedicated (Quike 199281; cf. Faiman 1958:76) 1n 
discussing royal cull, therefore, a distinction must be made beween the cults of deities 
whieh were ia theory maintained by the King, and worship of he King himself as 
intermediary berween fhe divine and human realms. The worship of he various gods and 


goddesses is discussed below. The following discussion fıeuses oa the cult of the king 
himself 


Royal cult statues 


Several depictions of royal statues are known ftom Early Dynastic sources, indicating 
shat the royal cult was eelebrted, 8t least in par, by means of statuary (Figure £4). The 
earliest ceain example dates to the reign of Den (Eatoa-Krmuss 1984:49). A. seal. 
impressioa from Abydos shows three royal figures, each of which stands oa a base-line 
(Kaplaay 1963, HI: pl. 93, fig 364: FD Friedman 199533, Rg. 19b). The accompanying 
hieroglyphs dekeribe the statues as belng mde of gold. The manufacture of royal statues 
"fomm metal is also tested in the late Second Dynasty (see below), On the Den sealing. 
he fist figure wears the while crown and bean, holds 4 staff and mace, and is in 
siding posture. The second figure wears e sed crown and bean, and stands in 4 
papyrus skifY in he act of harpooaing a hippopotamus. Ht may be compared with two 
‘ded statuettes fron the tomb of Tutankhamun: these show the king in s sionilar posture 
of harpooning, although the object of the hunt (the hippopotamus) is not shown (Ealon- 
Krauss 198490). The third figure on the Den sealing shows the King wearing the re 
crow und indirkilk, in the unparalleled posture of wrestling with a hippopotamus. A link 
has been made between these last two representations and The entry for the reign of Den 
on the Palermo Stone which records a hippopotamus hunt. A further seal-impression of 
Den, from the tomb of Hermaka st Saqqara, may also shou stamues of the King (Emery 
1938:64, fg. 26) Two royal figures are shown in striding of running posture, one 
wearing the red crown and one fhe white crown. A ground ine benca the figures - 
whieh does not continue under the animals shown bewcen therm suggests that they are 
to be interpreted ss statues, since human figures on Early Dynastic sealings do not 
usually stand on a grund-line (Etn-Krauss 1984:91), Comparable statues of the king in 
ıa striding or running posture are shown in the workshop scenes in the Eighteenth Dynasty 
toh of Rekhmira (Davies 1943: pls 36, 37, F.D Friedman 199533, fig. 190), A seal 
impression ions the tomb of Djer may show a similar striding stare (Petrie 1901: pl 
VI, but the rudimentary publication of he sealing makes a certain identitication 
impossible (Eton-Krauss 1984:92, a. 484), 1f proven, the sealing would be the earliest 
sepeesenution of û royal statue; antedatiag the sealimpressions of Den by two 
generations, 

‘Six inekseld stone vessels of Anedjîh depict royal statues. Taree of these, fom Saqqara, 
bear identical iaseriptions, showing a striding figure wesring fhe sed crown, beard and 
kilt holding a mace and the mı-stafl An insctiption from Abydos differs only ia That the 
King wears the white crown A locality is named n asoeiatioa with the figures, and this 
probably indicates the eult place where the royal states were kept The stane vessels are 
fikely to have belonged to he final equipment atached to the royal statue cult (Ealon- 
Krauss 1984:93). A rough and partially preserved inseripion of Anedjib's reign occurs 
on a stone vessel fragment fons the Step Pyramid complex. lı shows a striding figure in 
he act of harpooning. The head is lost, but, given the paralicls fron the preceding reign, 

almost certainly showed the King (Elon-Keuss 184.94) 

‘The fashioaing or dedication of another royal statue is recorded in a well-known entry 

on he Palermo Stone. The statue depicted the last king of the Second Dynasty and was 


ary drastic Haye 


called q3H sh vî ‘high is Khasekhemy'. The inseription states that it was made 
of copper; it may be compared with the ile-size copper stanê of Pepi I, found in he 
semele at Hierakonpolis (Quîbel and Green 1902: pls L-LII; Sethe 1914). Some doubt 
surrounds the deilication of he reis in whieh the stare of Khasekhemwry was 
commissioned. Same scholars favour Khasekhemvy's successor (tor example, Kaiser 
1961), bur it seems more likely that Khasekhennwy himself had he statue made 
(WS Senith 19712147). The royal statues attested fro the seigns of Den and Anedjib are 
examples of kings commissioning statues for their own cults. The creaion of large-scale 
metal seulptures illustrates the technological sophistication of Early Dynastic craftsmen. 


Figure 84 Royal cult statues. Evidence for the 
production and dedication of royal 
Seulpture in the Early Dynastic period: (1) 
seal-impression of Den from Abydos 
showing three statues of the king engaged 
in various ritual activities; the 
accompanying inseription states that the 
statues were made of gold (after Kaplony 
1963, IIE fig. 364); (2) (3) inseriptions on 
stone vessels of Ancdjib from the Step 
Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet; two 


statues of the king are depicted, one 
wearing the red crown, the other wearing 
the white crown (after Lacau and Lauer 
1959: planche IIL 1-2); (4) entry from the 
fifth register of the Palermo Stone, 
referring to a year (in the reign of 
Khasekhemwy or his successor) as ‘the 
year of dedicating the copper statue “high 
is Khasekhemwy™; this entry indicates 
that copper statuary was created long 
before the well-known images of Pepi 1 
and Merenra found in the temple at 
Hierakonpolis (after Schafer 1902: pl. ). 
Notto same scale. 


“The six relief panels installed beneath the Step Pyramid and South Tomb of Netjerikhet's 
morluary complex may depict royal statues rather than the king himself (ED Friedman 
1995:32). The close parallels betwreen onc of the panels and the stone vessel inseriptions 
of Anedjib described above seem to support this hypothesis. A relief fagment of 
"Negjerikhet roms Heliopolis, showing the King enthroned and acccanpanied by three royal 
ladies, may also depict a royal statue, but this snot certaia (Ealon-Krauss 1984:95) 


Buildings of he royal cult 


“The construction of buildings for the royal cult seems to have been the most important 
project of each reign, absorblag much of the cours revenue. Hence, the size of the royal 
Mortuary complex offers a guide both to Egypt's prosperity and to the power of he 
central govemment to exploit she country's resources Moreover, the incteasing 
elaboration of royal cult buildings fiom he Predynastic period onwards is ‘one of he 
most socially, economically and politically sensiive indicators of the rise of the state 
(Hofman 1080-336). The surviving buildings of the Early Dynostie soyal cult are 
Churacterised in general by heir apparent mortuary nature. The large enclosures of he 
Fit and Second Dynasties at Abydos, Saqqara and Hierakonpolis ane usually termed 
‘fonerary', and the Step Pyramid complex of Nejerikhet is regarded as having fullled a 
primarily mortuary role. However, he picture may not be so simple. There is evidence 
rom he Old Kingdon to indicate that he royal cul at a pyramid was celebrated during 
ihe lifetime of the reigning king. Furthermore, the dectrtion of Old Kingdom royal 
mortuary temples does not focus on funerary thenwes, but on the ritual duties and 
feuivals of Kingship, especially the Sel-testival (Seidlmayee 1996: 122). The same 
appears to be true of the surviving relief frugments fron the Hierakonpalis enclosure of 
Kkusekhemey, and of the six relief panels Form the Step Pyramid coenplex. I is possible, 
therefore, hat the Nejerikhet complex, and some if not all of its Fist and Second 
Dynasty antecedents, was used for the celebratioa of the royal cult before the King's 
del 


Barly drastic Haymt 20 


It has been suggested thatthe enclosure which occupies one commer of the walled town 
of Hierakonpolis may have been built by Khasekhem(wy) to serve his royal cult 
{O'Connor 1992. ln his ease, t may have been conceived as an iastirurion separate fromm 
he local temple of Horus of Nekhen, although occupying the same geographical location 
(Quiike 1992:13). There is no doubt that the large mudbcick enclosures built by 
Khusekhemwy on the low desert at Hierakoapolis and Abydos were comneetal with the 
soyal cull. They provide an carly illustration of the concept that The soyal cult was not 
festrieted 1o one location but could be eclebeated throughout the country, Furthenmoe It 
would seem that royal cult centres were not confined to the immediate vicinity of the 
King's burial (Quiıke 199282) The most vivid illustratioas of this polat are the small 
sep pyramids of the late Third Dynasty (Seidimayer 1996). Located at ses throughout 
Middle and Upper Egypt, al but one of the pyramids seen 1o have been buil in the reign 
of Hunî (Flue 8.1). They ‘must have marked the locations of an oficial cult ceatered 
[sic] around tbe person of the King’ (Seidlmayer 1996: 122), This is confirmed by the 
objects found st the pyramid of Sella, dated to the following reign of Sncfenv: stelae with 
he king's name, ffngmenls of a shrine, a royal statue 


Plate 8.1 Markers of the royal cult. Four of a series 
of small step pyramids erected throughout 
the Nile valley atthe end of the Thi 
Dynasty: (top lef) Zawiyet el-Meitin, on 
the east bank of the Nile just south of the 
modern city of Minya: (top right) Abydos 
south, also known as Sink; (bottom left) 
“Takh, just north of Naqada; (bottom right) 
ıel-Kula, just north of Hierakonpolis 
(author's photographs) 


and an offering-table (Leclant and Clete 1988: pl. 32; Edvranls 1993:69; Seidlmayer 
T996b: 122) The distribution of royal cult centres of this type throughout the country 
seems to be linked to the exploiation of agticultural resources, There may originally have 
een a small sep pyramid i each nome: the location of the three southernmost pyramids 
certainly suggests such distribution, They would therefore have represented ‘a project 
of mapping the royal cult across he country” (Seidlmayer :ا1996‎ 124) The small step 
pyramids may be seen as the predecessors of the funerary estates depicted in procession 
i the temple of Snefer's Bent Pyramid st Dahshur, and of the nome-trlads from the 
valley temple of Menkaurs, The small step pyramids belong 1o a time when the economic 
system characteristic of the Old Kingdom ras being devised. ‘Constncting these 
monuments throughout the county could have served 1o make explicit and iotelligtale the 
ideological background to the economic demuads of he suke o a local level" 
(Seidlmayer 1996b: 124) The monuments of Huni's eign emphasise that ihe royal cult, 
throug ils political and eeonamie iafluenee, was central to the unity ol EYP 

The situation on the island of Elephantine is paricularly revealing about the religious 
programme and priorities of the Early Dynastic court. The investment of resources in a 
monument of tle royal cult—a small step pyramid and an adjoining administrative 
Complex stands in marked contrast to the oficial neglect of the local shrine. hndeed, the 
state-sponsored consiruction of a fortress at he beginning of the Early Dynastic peviod 
Showed flagrant contempt for local religious practice, encroaching as did on the small 
community shrine nearby, The failure of the central suthoities t0 care for this sanemuary 
was clearly not a mater of lacking funds, but of a completely different ideological 
background (Seidlnayer 19966: 122). The name of the complex sdjscent to the small 
step pyramid at Elephanine was siahsni-Hvt, (the palace) dade of King Hun’. This 
may be connected with hh-sid, ‘the festival of the dinde’, whieh figures among the 
coronation sites of Shepseskaf as recoded oa the Palermo Stone. Like the cult at royal 
‘finerary” monuments, the royal cult prıctised at Elephantine seems alco to have bees 
connected with festivals of kingship (Sedlmayer 1996 1224) 


Royal ancestors 


Reverence for the royal ancestors, well attested in later periods (for example, the New 
Kingdon king lists at Karmak and Abydos), may alıeady kave played an inıportant role 
Early Dynastic heology. In particular, the 1ol of royal ancestors ia legilmising a new 
king seems lo have been recognised by Nejerikhet niho, according to later tndiion (lhe 
Turin Canon) was the founder of a new dynastic line, and whose connection with the 
kings ofthe First and Seeond Dynasties may have been tenuous, His appropriation of the 
«ores of stone vessels collected by royal predecessors to furmish his own burial may be 
interpreted tn this light as ‘a revospective acknowledgement of the pharaonic monarchy’ 
(ED. Friedman 1995:10, quoting Radford 1986:14). 


Corpus of dellies attested n the Early Dmastlc period 


Tireughout the course of Egyptian civilisation, unnamed deities are notoriously difficult 
to identify. The phenomenon of the “interchangeability of stributes" makes secure 
idenlifieion difficult, even if the iconography seems to point unambiguously 1o 4 


Bary drastic Haye 242 


particular god or goddess (Pinch, personal communication 1905). The deatification of 
he deities isted below is reasonably certain in all but six cases, hese being denoted wilh 
ıa question mark (?). (See Figure £5 for a map showing the locadion of cults.) 


Anti 


Depicted as a faleon in a bark, Antî was a local god of Middle Egypt, worshipped oa the 
cast bank of the Nile, especially in he Badarî region. 


Figure &.5 Early Dynastic cult dedications. The map 
‘shows the location of cult centres 


associated with particular deities, as 
atested in comtemporary sources Capitals 
denote ancient place names. 


The deity was know to classieal authors as Antaeus, and his cult centre, Qu, as 
Antaeopolis. A copper ewer from a wealthy late Second Dynasty grave at Badr, grave 
429, bore the incised inserption hn F mrp ‘the priest Aetkhotep (Brunton 1927: 
pl. XVIN.10) This theophorous name is probably the earliest mention of the god Ant 

nd indicates the reverence shown to he dekey io the Badarî region fron an early period. 


Anubis 


The fashioning or dedication of a divîne image of a jackal is recorded as a salient event 
ona label of Aha from Abydos. The jackal deity in question is generally assumed t0 be 
Anubis, god of the desert necropolis, and he figures prominently in Fist Dynasly royal 
‘inseriptioas, The dedication of his image was apparenlly repeated in subsequent relgns of 
he First Dyrasty: the Palermo Stone records an occurrence in the penultimate regnal year 
of an unidentilied First Dynasty King, and in year $ of a subsequent First Dynasty ruler. 
The distinctive standard of Anubis appears on a sealing of Djer from Abydos (Petrie 
1901: pl. XV.108), whilst a stone vessel fiagment from the same King’s tonsb is incised 
wil the igure of Anubis (Petrie 1902: pl. 1.8. From the end of the First Dynasty, 4 
jackal deity is depicted on a sealing fro the tomb of Qas (Peuie 1900: pl XXIX A6), 
and a recumbent jackal appears on the stela of Sabef, an oficial buried in one of the 
tog subsidiary graves (Petrie 1900: pl. XXX; ef Weill 1961, chapter &. The figure of 
Amubis also appears on a private Fist Dyasty sela excavated by Amélineau in 1895 
(Perie 1900: pl. XXXILIT. 

The ûmiwt fish, closely associated in later times with Anubis, occurs not 
infiequenlly oa Early Dynastic sealing. One scholar has suggested that the fetish played 
ıa important role during formal appearances of the king in public, an that a new fetish 
would have been fashioned t0 commemorste signifcant royal events, especially he 
foundation or dedication of a temple (Logan 1990:69), The hypothesis that the feish was 
ıassociated with ritual killings (Logan 1990.69) is based upon 3 single piece of evidence, & 
wooden label of Aba from Abydos, and must remain unproven. 

"Anubis should not be confused with another jackal god, Wepwawet (perhaps he same 
a Sed). 


Apis (ap) 


"ln later perinde the Apis bull was Hdentiet with Puah, but it is posible that Apis wras 
originally a separate deity. Aceoding 1s luce radiion, the el f Apis was cstablishel 
By Menes (ef Simpson 1957: Logan 1990:64), although the earliest known reference 10 
he Apis bull occurs somewhat lue, in he reign of Den. His segnal year +12 oa the 
Palermo Stoae e Hlenilied by the ‘nunaing ofthe Apis” This Feival alsa took place i 
Yer 3 of Seeihet reserved oa he mal Cale Rapinant (ie anal lı he eign of 
Oa eeconded on nu year libel hoa Atydos: Lacan and Clete 1902. pl XXVIIL e. 
Sb Decor af al TOE: and ln years X4 and x10 of e Second Dynasty king, 
Nini. 

"An ehony label of Aha ftom Abydos whieh recondls a royal vist to the Delta also 
depicts, in the second egir, 8 bull within an enelsure (Pevie 1901: pl 1ILA-S), The 
Bul is not named, and i may be the Apis bull, bur a comeeia wri s bull cul a BMS 


Bary drastic Haye 1 


(an der Way 1989.285) is perhaps more plausible, given the nearby Iocation of he other 
shrines show on the label. 


AM 


Probably a protecioe deity comnectad with royal estates, Ash appears to have been 
particularly important at the end of the Second Dynasty (for example, Petrie 1901: pl 
KXILITSY Ash is depicted on a number of sealings fron the reigns of Peribsen and 
Khasekhenwry. On sealings of Peribsen and Sekhemib the god may be shown wearing 
he white crown, and is sometimes depicted with the head of the Sethranimal, suggesting 
hat there may have been a connection—perhaps an carly example of syneretismr— 
between the Iwo gods. 


Bastet 


Closely associated in later times with the site of Bubustis in the Delta (ancient Egyptian 
Bel), the cat goddess Basie may none the lest have had a separate origin, since her 
name is written fio the carliest times with the ointment jar (whieh also had the sound 
value Bir in ancient Egyplian). The name Bastet may therefore mean ‘she of he 
olatment jar rather fan ‘she OF Bubestis' (Shaw and Nicholson 1995:50). Bustet 
assumed a degree of peominence in the early Second Dynasty, though for wiha reson 
Semains unclear. The figure of he goddess appears on ascribed stone vessels of both 
Hetepsekhemmwy and Nebra (Lacau and Lauer 1959: pl. 11, nos S1, S8). An inscription 
from he following reign of Nineljer names the phyle of priests responsible oF he 
provisioning of Bastet (in other words, for maintaining her cul: s3 3w B31 (Lacu 
nd Lauer 1959: pl. 13, nos 63-6). At the end of the Second Dynasty, a priest of Bustet 
(and servant of Sobek) is mentioned ca an incised stone vessel om the tomb of 
Khısekhemey (Amdlineau 1902: pl. XXILI Ia Utersnce S08 ($1111) of the Pyramid 
Texts, Bastet appears as the King's mother, but wre cannot be sure if she was dentfied a6 
such in he Early Dynastic period 


BuvHlathoe 


Bal is a rather obscure goddess whose cult centre seems to have been in the seventh 
Upper Egyptian name, near the town of Hu. A Predyrastic paletle Rom Girza shows a 
celestial cow goddess, her head surrounded by stars. This objet indices that he 
worship of a fermale protective deiy with astral connotations, perhaps already identified 
as Bar, was a feature of Egyptian religion ftom at least he middle of he fourth 
millennium BC (Hornung 1983-103). A very similar representation may be seen on the 
fim of a diorite bowl Rom Hierakonpolis, duted to the late Predynastic period 0¢ carly 
First Dynasty (Burgess and Arkell 1958; Fischer 1962). The best-known representations 
of Rat cceur on the Kamer Palete (cf Baines 1991104). A celestial goddess with a 
human fice and the cars and horms of a cow appears both at the top of the palete and on 
he king's belk (AT least one author Identifies the goddess on Narmer's belt as Haho, 
based upon Utterınce 135 (§546) in he Pyramid Texts whieh states that ‘the “pron” of 
he king comes from Hathor' [Troy 1986-541) Another Early Dynastic sepresemttion of 


Bat oceues on a limestone model of a carrying shrine, fiom a deposit of early votive 
objects. The figure OF Bat is recessed within fhe froat of the shrine (Sehlög 1978-27, pls 
SIaze). A gold amulet from the Early Dynastic cemetery at Naga et-Deie (grave N 1532) 
shows a bull with the Bal-fesh and an anh pendant hanging from iis neck (Reisner 
1908: pl. 6; Fischer 1962:12) The But-fetish is also depicted on the ivory inlays of a box 
fiom Abu Rawash (Klasens I95€:53-4, 1g. 200, pl. 39, Fischer 1962:13, a. 45), whilst 
ıa ivory froan the tomb of Semerklhet st Abydos is decorated with wo heads of Bat, very 
ısîmilar to those shown at the 1op ofthe Narmer Palette (Peleie 1900: pl. XXVILT1). 

‘The name of Bat seers 1o be a feminine fue ofthe word b2, ‘soul’. 1n Urteranee S06 
(1095) of he Pyramid Texts, he King identities himself with “Bat wilh her two ices’ 
ıe Texts also contain several references o the ‘great wild cov’ as the king's mother, of 
example Uueranee 675 ($2003). The “great will cow’ was later regarded as 4 
manifestation of Hathor; and, indeed, there are strong connections between Bat and 
Harbor, even though they probably had sepuzate origins. Both godlesses probably served 
ıa protective function (F.D\Fricdenan 1995:3); Bat is sometimes described as particular 
manifestation of Hathor; Hathor eventually supplanted Bat as the local deity of Hu; and 
he two goddesses share very similar iconography. These similarities have lel 1o some 
confusion in the minds of modern scholars, Thus, the Bat-letish, although sometimes 
accompanied, and hence Mdeatified, by its phonetic complement, is offen referred to as the 

‘Hathor emblem, ‘on the basis of the later and abundant evidence foe is identification 
wilh that goddess’ (Fischer 1962:11). There is no explicit reference to Hathor before the 
Fourth Dynasty, although the temple of Hathor at Gebelein apparently received royal 
patronage at the end of ihe Second Dynasty. I seems likely that in this area, Egyptian 
Beology was charscterised by “a common substearum of ideas which lent the two 
goddesses a somewhat similar character” (Fischer 1962:12). 

Hathar 's name (‘house of Horus’) ‘proclaimed motherhood as her principal function’ 
(Frankfort 1948.171), so it is not surprising that the Egyptians portrayed her a a cow: 
here are parallels in other Aican, particulaely Hamiie, cultures in whieh the cow is 4 
powerful mother-image (Frankfort 1048:1734) 


Desire (he red crow) 


A shrine or enclosure dedicated to the red crown is shown on a year label of Djer fromm 
Abydos (Amelineau 1904: pl. XV.19; Emery 1961:59, fig 20). The label seems to recon 
ıa royal visit 1o the Dela, and a device in the top register probably indientes a sacred 
Complex ar Buto (see belor). is very likely that The shrine to the red crow symbol 
closely associated with Lower Egypt since the unifeation of the country__would have 
been located in the Del. A canncctign berween the red crown and Wadjet, the serpent 
godless of Buto and tutelary goddess of Lower EYP, is suggested by an ivory label of 
Diet rom mastaba S1504 a Saqqars (Emery 1054: pl. XKXVDY. 1n the wring of the 
Tuo Ladies’, Ihe usual serpent is replaced by a red crown (ef. Gardiner 1958), We may 
perhaps conclude thal the shrine 1o the red erown of Lower Egypt was located within he 
temple of Wadjer at Bulo. 


Early drastic iaymt 6 


ae 


The earth god Geb is shown in human form oa a relief fragment from a limestone chapel 
of Netjerikhet from Heliopolis (nov in Turin). Ir has been suggested that the original 
decoration showed all nine members of the Heliopolitn ennead, siace the gure of Seth 
is also preserved (ef Baines 1991:96). However, F is alo possible that the shrine was 
dedicated to the ‘corporatioa (i 1), an earlier grouping of gods, referred to in the names 
of Semerkhet, Nejerikhet and Sekhemkhet; the corpormtioa ray have been superseded 
by the Heliopolitun ennead when solar theology rose to prominence towards the end of 
ihe Third Dynasty (Hornung 1983.222). Originally, both groupings peobably symbolised 
he gods in their ‘indefnite plurality’: in Egyptian writing, three represented the plural 
concept, three times three (making a ennead) a plural of plurlities (Homung 1983222) 
A one of he Heliopolitan ennesd und as an ean god ftom the time of cretion, Geb 
features prominently in the Pyramid Texts (for example in the ‘Cannibal Hymn’ 
Unerances 2734 [$$393-414]) The king himself is identified vith Geb in Uuterance S99 
(iets) 


Harsaphes 


“The ram god Harsaplhes (iri-i=f in Egyptian) may have originated as a primitive fertility 
god (ef B.Aleamûller 1977 but is beter attested in historic times as the local god of 
Herakleopolis. The Palermo Stone records a vist by Den in his segaal year x+9 1o 
Herakleopolis; in he same year the king alo visited he temple of a ram detly, and it is 
tempting lo identify this as the local god of Herakleopolis, Harsaphes. An inscribed stone 
vessel fragment of Den From his ommb at Abydos may rele? to fhe same event. i shovs aa 
omate sanetuary With a rar inside, and a shrine topped by a bucranium (Peuie 1901: pl 
VILE 9) A conection with The royal cult has been posited for Harsaphes, particularly 
wgiven the Egyptian name for Herıkleopolis, Nrwnswr (B.Altenmûller 1977), 


Hedjet (the white crown) 


A ehapel ofthe white erourn (ot, less plausibly, an estate named afer the white crown) is 
named on an inscribed stone vessel Of Heepsekhemwy Roan the Step Pyramid complex 
(Lacau and Lauer 1959: pl. 11, no. 55). Aa institution by the samme name ts mentioned on 
a vessel of Niner (Lacan and Lauer 1959: pl. 16, no. 78), suggesting a speclal 
reverence towards the white crown by the Kings of ihe carly Secoad Dynasty, One 
possible imerpretation is that homage to Upper Egypt and is iconography may have bee 
sessed following the relocation of the soyal necropolis 10 Saqqera st the beginning of 
he Second Dynasty, and the concomitant loosening of ies between the kingship and 
Upper Egypt I has been suggested that the inseriptions of Hetepsekhemwy and Ninetjer 
reler to shrines set up at the Residence in Mernphis (R& Friedman 1908422, quoting 
Kaplony 1963). In origin, the white crown may have been particularly closely asssciated 
wilh the Predynastie rulers of Hierakoapolis. The cal god of Hierakonpolis, Horus of 
Nekhen, was customarily depicted as an archaic falcon, often wearing the white crow 
(B.Adams 1977) 


Hedjwer 


The baboon deity named Hw, ‘the Great White’, is first attested unequivocally on an 
ivory label of Semerkhet from Abydos (Petrie 1900, pl. XIL1 =pl. XVIL26). However, a 
basan statue from the reign of Narmer (E Schou 1969) may represent The same deity, as 
may the figure of an enthroned baboon shown before a statue of Den on a seal-impression 
fromm Saqqara (Kaploay 1963, 1l. ig. 211: F.D.Friedman 1995:33, fg. 19e). Oe scholar 
has suggested tha the royal ancestors in whose presence the king took possession of the 
symbols of rule at the beginning of his reign und again ar the beginning of the Sed 
festival were manifest a a white baboon (Hiclek 195275, 197297; ef, Kemp 1989:60, 
ig. 20). The middle relief panel of Nejerikhet from beneath his Step Pyramid shows the 
King stunding al the { &J# wrt ‘the white shrine of the great ones’ (an altemalive 
reading is wr i . ‘the great ones of the white shrine’) (FD Friedman 1905:24) The 
nt, ‘great ones’, ane determined by the figure of a large, squatting baboon. If Helek's 
inerprelalioa is correct, ‘the plurality of ancestors denoted by the baboon may be 
handing over rulership 10 Djoser, as signified by he testament he holds” (F.D Friedman 
1995:28). 

It is possible that the baboons of glazed composition and stone, frequently deposited 
ıa votive offecings in early shrines, were coanceted with Heder. although other habooa 
deities are known to have existed. References 1o a baboon deity, sometimes explicitly 
denied ss Hedjwer, are common in the Early Dynastic period and Pyramid Texts, but 
ıare rare in subsequent periods (Kaplony 1977. 


Heqet 
The fiog godless Heqet was associated with fertiliry and childbirth. This connection 
probably derived from the myriad tadpoles which a Rog produecs, a fact which also led 
1o he tadpole being used as the hieroglyph for one-hundrelhousand. Heqet is 
mentioned oly once in the Pyramid Texts, bu her cul seems to have been popular ta the 
Early Dynastic period (Cooney and Simpson 1976:2057 Tuo higlrstatss individuals 
(ineluding a royal prince) buried at Helwan in the Second Dynasty bore heophorous 
names compounded with Heqel, indicating that her cult was active at the time (Sand 
957.7-10, pls Hl, IV [nos 2, 31) The Early Dynastic stela of Wepemnolret (now at 
Berkeley) also mentions Heqet. A large travertine starvete of a frog ia the Cleveland 
Museum of Arts (CMA 76.5) may be an carly cul image of Heqet (Cooney and Simpson 
1976). One of only a few surviving examples of large.seale stone anil sculpture fron 
he lale Predlynastic and Early Dynastic periods, it has been tentatively dated to the reign 
of Nanmer, largely on the basis of stylistic parallels with the baboon statue in Berlin 
Alhough sequired on the art market and unpeovenanced, the frog statuette may have 
come fom Abydos where there seems to have been a particular emphasis oa the cult of 
Heqet: small og figurines were found in he otive deposits undemeath ihe Abydos 
temple (Pelwie 1903: pls X.214, 227, X1.240, 245; cf. Dreyer 1986: pls 32170-2, 61.4.1, 
Rih, and ihe goddess Heqet is shown in her shrine in the temple of Seti 1 (Cooney and 
Simpson 1976-207, fg. 12 


ary drastic Haye 8 


Honus 


Perhaps originally a sky god, Horus became the deity most intimately associated with the 
kingship fons the late Predyastic period ontwands (cf, Hayes 1953:29, fig. 22; Wiliams 
T96: pls 33, 38). I is difficult 10 be sure exactly how ihe Egyptians envisaged the 
relationship between Horus and the king (Hornung 1983192), bur fhe adoption of Honus 
as he supreme royal tile suggests that he Egypûans “found in the soaring falcon their 
perfect metaphor for majesty’ (Quirke 1992.21. 

Falcon deities were worshipped st several shies ia Egypt Whilst they are usually 
segardel as local gods of independent origin, it is equally possible that ‘they were 
predynastic differentations of one aod the same deity’, regarde as the supreme gd by 
FEzyptlans in general (Frankfort 1948:39-40). Perhaps Ihe most important cult centre of 
Horus in Early Dynastic times was Hierakonpolis, Even in Inter dynastic mes the cult 
image of the local god, Horus of Nekhen, was depicted ss an archaic falcon, apparently 
emphasising the antiquity of the Horus cuit at the site. The associarion of Hous with the 
kingship may reflect the importance of Hierakonpolis as a centre of Pretlynastie political 
power. 

A distinctive fom of Horus attested by name fron the early Third Dynasty is Hec 
BM ‘Horus the Behdetite. The northemmast relief panel under the Step Pyramid 
shows the King, wearing the white crown, ‘standing in the Upper Egyptian shrine of 
Horus the Behdeite’ (Kemp 108058, Tig. 1%; F.DFicdman 1905:18) The 
corresponding panel from the South Tomb gives this same name to the falcon hovering 
over ihe king and holding an ant (F.D. Friedman 1995.20). ln origin, the sond hl 
means ‘throne set’, and kdl may mean ‘he of the throne seal’ (Oo 1975, 
F.DFriedman 1995-18) Hence, there may have been a special connection berwemn Honus 
the Behdetite and kingship, Allouglh Beladet was later dented with Tell e-Balamun in 
ihe northern Delta (Cianliner 1944) or with Edfu in southem Upper Egypt, "in Djoser's 
day the Behdetite may not have been associated with a fixed Iscaliry, possibly being 
understood more generally ss a peotective power of the king’ {F.D. Friedman 1995:30; ef 
Kemp 1989:41). 

The middle relief panel fiom the South Tomb mentions another distinct form of 
Horus: Hr Hm, ‘Hors of Lelopolis'. is significant that this panel is the only one on 
which the king weurs fhe red crow, and the accompanying inscription uses he 
archetypal Lower Egyptian shrine as the determinative for the cul-place of Hocus of 
Letopolis. The god "had impofant soyal associations in ihe carly Old Kingdon 
(ED.Friednan 1995.36, various aspects of his insignis being depicted on the funerary 
furniture of Queen Hetep-heres. 


Latllamet 


On he Palermo Stone, he fifth regal year of an unidentified First Dynasty King is 
denoted by he fashioning or dedication oF a divîne image of amet. latllamet (the resting 
ofihe name is uncertain) is also mentioned in the Pyramid Texts, and she was possibly & 
milk goddess, sesponsible for nourishing and nursing the king (Helck 1980) 


ais (2) 
The fret-gindle associated with leis is atested as early as the First Dynasty. Aa amulet of 
his shape made of glazed composition was found ia an Early Dynastic tomb at Helvran. 
However, unambiguous references 1o Isis by name do aot appear until fhe Fiflh Dynasty 
Ci the Pyramid Texts of nas). The throne-sign used to write The name of lis occurs on 
û sealing of Peribsen (Pete 1901: pl XXI176), but it is unclear whether the goddess 
herself is meant. An Early Dynastic roclceut inseription on Hill B near Buhen may 
mention Isis (HLS Sith 1972:59 60). 


Khentiameniu 


The god of the Abydos necropolis, ‘the Foremost of the Westemers', is named oa the 
necropolis seals of Den (Dreyer 1987) and Qaa (Dreyer eral 1996:72, fg, 25), 1k is likely 
haf the first temple at Abydos, founded in he late Prelynastic period, was dedicated 10 
Khentiamentîu (perhaps already an epithet used as a euphemisns for Osis). The temple 

caine this dediention throughout the Old Kingdon (a tela set up in the temple refer Io 
Sstamues of Pepi II ‘in the temple of Kheniametiu’ [O'Connor 1992-891), oaly bceoming 
ûû cult centre dedicated explicitly 1o Osieis ia the Fist Intermediate Period. 


Khmum 


A ram deity, possibly Khnum, is one of the elements composing a personal name on a 
private tela Irom Abydos dating to the reign of Djer (Petrie 1901: pl. XXVL62) and one 
om the following seign of Djet (Petrie 1902: pl. XIIL1S1). Another theophorous 
personal name, read as Khnum-hotep, occurs oa a sealing from the tomb of Memeith 
(Rewie 1900: pl. XXIIL42). Numerous iaserbed stone vessels from the galleries beneath 
the Step Pyramid bear the personal nane Iy-en-khnum (Laeau and Lauer 1965.38, pls 
2-9 [nos 2 8]) and this individunl probably lived during the eign of Ninetjer (Kahl 
1994:8980; Falings and Köhler 1996:100, n. 52). An even closer devotion to the god is 
expressed in the personal name H annm-ii(-), ‘Khmunm is (my) Ruhe, inscribed o0 
another stone vessel fromm the Step Pyramid hoard (Lacau and Lauer 196549, pl. 293 
no. 951). An incomplete First Dynasty plaque of glazed composition fon he carly 
temple at Abydos shows a ram holding a wus-sceptre. The figure is accompanied by « 
complex jumble of hieroglyphs, the intespeetution of which is diffieul, bur the ram amay 
be Khun (Petrie 1903: pls, V36). 


Mallet 


A stone vessel frugment fiom the tomb of Den at Abydos shows the fetish of the feline 
goddess Maflet (Petrie 1901: pl. VILT). Possibly frorm The same sei, another inscribed 
stone vessel shows Maflet as lioness, though clearly identified by ame; the lefk-hand 
fmgment was found in the tomb of Den at Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. VIL 10), but he 
righthand fragment was found in the neighbouring tanb of Semerklhct (Potrie 1900: p1 
WILA). (For the wo frgments joined see O'Connor 1987:35, hg. 14) A fragmentary 

from the tomb of Den also shows he fetish of Mafûet (Petrie 1900: pl 
XXXII.30). The importance of the goddess in the reign of Den is ermplhusîsed by an etry 


Bary dynastic taye 20 


for this king on the Palermo Stone: one of the eponymous events of Den's year x+13 is 
he fashioning or dediention of a divine image of Maller (see Figure £6 for all these 
illustrations). Since an image of Seshat was dedicated in the same year, there may have 
been a coanection between the Two goddesses, hough this s by no means certain. 

‘In the Pyramid Text, Maflet is referred to as a killer of snakes (Uuerance 295 [$A38]) 
(Gardiner 138:89), and mote particularly as 


Figure 8.6 The goddess Mafdet. Represented as a 
feline, Mafdet may have acted as guardian 
of the king in the palace. Her cult appears 
to have enjoyed particular prominence 
during the reign of Den: (1) seal- 
impression of Den from Abydos, showing 
the fetish of Mafdet (aller Petrie 1900: pl. 
XXXIL.39); (2) relief inseription on a 
stone vessel from the tomb of Den at 
Abydos, showing the fetish of the goddess 
Mafilet (afer Petrie 1901: pl. VIL); (3) 


entry from the third register of the 
Palermo Stone, referring to a year in the 
reign of Den as ‘the year of dedicating an 
image of Mafdet’ (after Schafer 1902: pl 
1D; (4) inscription depicting and naming 
Mafîlet, on a stone vessel from Abydos, 
dating to the reign of Den (after Petrie 
1900: pl. VILA; Petrie 1901: pl. VIL10). 
Notto sume scale. 


ıprotectress and avenger of the king (Uernce 297 [$440-1]), The poiats of the hampooa 
Wilh which he king decapitates his adversaries are likened 1o “the claws of Mallet’ 
(Unerance 519 [§1212]). Mafdet may have held a special place in the sphere of kingship 
during The Early Dynastic period, perhaps responsible for he purely physical well-being 
of he king (Westendorf 1966:1315) As al hut nh , ‘mistress of the estate (or 
mansioa) of life’, Mafdet may have been considered as the protecting power of the royal 
cour. la he Early Dynastic period the “Estate of Life” muy have designated the living: 
quarters of the soyal palace (Gardiner 1938.89), or perhaps more specifically ‘the royal 
eating and food storage areas', and Maflct may have been embodied in the cats whieh 
probably protected these facies against snakes snd vermin (O'Connor 1987:35) 
‘Another suggestion is hat Malet was originally tamed big car (possibly a leopard used 
for hunting) Who escorted the ruler, protecting him snd at the same time symbolising his 
Silent power andl strength (Westendoc 1966-11-5). The felish of Maflet shows 
execution equipmeat, and the goddess is thus regarded as a manifestation of judicial 
authority (Lurker 1980:79). The connection may be that, as the deity symbolic of royal 
power, she led rebels to their execution. 


mehit 


A deity associated with Hierakoapolis and (pcimmaeily) This (Emery 1961:1258), Mehit is 
depicted as a recumbent lioness with three bent poles peojecting om her back. Mehit 
ıoceurs on a uber of Early Dynastic sealings (for example, Petrie 1901: pl. XVL.116 
always preceling a depiion of the archetypal Upper Egyptian shrine, the prow. Mehit 
may have been a general protector deity, associated with holy places. His quite possible 
that, ike Honus the Behdetie, the lioness godless later identilied as Mehit was not, at 
frsl, attached 1o a particular locality. 


Min 


The colossal statues of a fertility god found in the temple at Coptos indicate that he cult 
ofthe deity later named as Min was important ons Fredynaste times (Payne 1993: ef. 
Kemp 1989:81, fig. 28; Dreyer 1995). Although in origin a local deity of Coptos (which 
always remained {he god's principal cult centre), Min probably enjoyed a national 
significance om an early perd. The tradition in the Late Ferid Baar Min ruled Egypt at 
e beginning of history a myth which linked Min with he first ‘historic King 


Early drastic Haye 252 


Menes—emay preserve echoes of the god's importance during the period of state 
formation (Hornung 183:108). The “thunderbolt” symbol of Min, also attested fro the 
Predynastic period, occurs on the Scorpion macehead, on a divine standard. Two sueh 
symbols are depicted anking the head of Bat on a decorated voy plaque Rom Early 
Dynastic Cemetery 300 at Abu Rawash (Klasens 1958:50, fig. 20y), 53, pl. XXV), The 
symbol is also shown oa a privte stela ftom the reign of Djer (Pete 1901. pl. XXVL6S) 
and on a sealing fron the tomb of Merneith at Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl. XVIL13S) It has 
been suggested thal, like other prominent deities, Min may originally have been a god 
associated with the celestial realm, in this case the phenomenon of thunder (Wainuright 
1941:30). The Palermo Stone recoils the fashioaing or dedication of an image of Min as 
he eponymous event Of year 7 of an unidentified First Dynasty king. An dentical eotry is 
given for year 6 of Semerkhet (on the mais Cairo fragment), and for year 3 of an 
unidentified Third Dynasty king. A fagment of a slate bowl fiom the tomb of 
Khasekhenmey is inscribed in lk with the figure of Min (Pete 1902. pl. HILA. 
Identical ieserîpticas were found in the galleries beneath the Step Pyramid, idicating 
that both sets of funerary provisions were drawn fiom the same source (Lacau and Lauer 
1965: pl. 1S.1-S). The fll text gives the legend pr Mw ‘estate of Min, showing that 
he cult of Mîn was ouriahing and in receipt of eyal pattoaage at he end of the Second 
Dynasty. 


Neh 


Keith was û warlike goddess whose name perhaps means ‘the tertifying one. Her 
symbol, the crossed arrows, occurs as easly ss the Predynastic period, and Neilh was 
Clearly aa important deity st the very beginning of the Early Dyeustie period, with a 
‘dominant role at the royal count (Hornung 1983-71) ‘Neith' is thus a common cement 
in the theophorous names of Early Dynastic queens (ef. Weill 1961, chapter 13), notably 
Neithrhotep (the wife of Narme, Hemeith (pomsibly a wife of Djet) and Mermeith (the 
mother of Den and regent during his minority). Personal names incorporating the name of 
Neith are alo commen amongst the retainers buried in the subsidiary graves surrounding 
he royal tomabs at Abydos ftom the reign of Djer (Peuie 1900: pl. XXXL9 [tomb 21, 10 
[tomb WSI], 11 [tomb WSE], 20 [toanb T], pl. XXILI4. A label of Aha seems to recoed 
ıa royal visi lo the shrine of Neith, This vras probably located at Sal in the norlh-westens 
Delta, the principal cul centre of Neith in historic times (Pewie 1901: pl. A.S). (The 
inscription of Wadjhor-resne, recording the restoration of the temple of Neth at Sais 
during the Persian period, speaks of the andquity of the tewple and is cult [Lichtheins 
1980:36-411) One of Merka's numerous tiles was hrs ‘r NE ‘priest of Neth’ The 
reverence shown to the cult of Neith by the early Kings of Egypt and their wives may 
eflect the importance of the Delta, and of Sais in particular, in the prmcess of state 
formation. 

Neith clearly remained important during the Second Dynasty, An inscribed stone bowl 
ftom the Step Pyramid complex shows the igure of the goddess in front of the serek of 
Ninejer, with an estate of Nebra also named (Lacau and Lauer 1059:14, pl. 16 no. 77). A 
Second Dynasty princess bore ihe name Neitrhotep (Lacau and Lauer 1959: pl. 21, me. 
112), while a pyle (or more likely, perhaps its head priest) was called hm NL ‘servant of 
Neth (Laeau and Lauer 1959:17, pl 21 no. 116) 


Nakhbet 


The name Nekhbet simply means ‘she of Elkab’, and the main cult centre of the godless 
was located st this she in sourhem Upper Egypt. However, from the very beginning of 
Egyptian history, Nekhbet assumed an addionsl, national importance as utelary goddess 
ofthe whole of Upper Egypt. Depicted as a vulture, Nekhbet joined the cobra goddess of 
Bute, Wadjet, 1o fem the Tue Ladies’, divine proteetresses of the Two Lands. The 
balance of opposites which Nekhibet andi Wadjet embodied led to the inclusion of the 
Tuo Luslies" ia the formal itulary of he King, fromm at least the reign of Semerkhet. The 
earliest surviving depiction of the Two Ladies’ occurs somewhat earlier, on the 
celebrated cbony libel fron the tomb of Neith-hotep at Naqada, dating 10 1h reign of 
Aha. Rockeut inseripëons of Qua near Elkab also show the figure of Neklibet, and there 
is a reference to the goddess oa the Palermo Stone ia regnal year x+14 of Ninejer. The 
incorporation of various iemportant local deities (such as Nekhbel, Wadjet and Seh) into 
carly royal itslary and iconography seems to have bee one of the means by which the 
unity of the new stale was promoted on a psychological level. ke thus forms a Key 
component of the mechanisnw of rule developed by Egypt's Early Dynastic rulers. 


Osis (2) 


Alhough the god Osiris is not atestal by name until the FRR Dynasty Pyramid Texts, 
ihe peobable antiquity of many of these texts makes i not unlikely that he was recognised 
at an earlier period, pechaps under he same Khentlamentiu. A central element of the later 
Osiris myth, the pang of Honus and Seth, is attested Rom the middle of he First 
Dynasty: ‘antedating the first atestations of Osiris By six centuries or more” (Quirke 
1992:61) 1t may be significant hat wo ivory objects in the form of the djedplllar, later 
Jone of the emblems associated ith Osiris, were found amongst The grave goods in 3 First 
Dynasty tomb at Helwan (Saad 1947227, pl. IVD). 


Pu 


Later revered as the god of craftsmen, Ptah was always closely associated with the royal 
capital, Memphis. Manetho records that Menes, the legendary fest king of Egypt built a 
temple to Ptah at Memphis, but it is possible that a local cult of Pah existed in the area 
before he beginning of the First Dymsty. The first definite attestation of Pah is on a 
seaverine bowl from tomb 231 at Tarkhan, dated to the middle of the First Dynasty, 
possibly the reign of Den (Pewie er al. 1913:12, 22, pls ILI, XXXVI). The figure of he 
god in his shrine is accompanied by the name ‘Pal, making the identification certain. A 
Sculptor named Peh-en-Plah is mentioned on a stone vessel Troan the tomb of Peribsen at 
‘Abydos (Améliseau 1905: pl. L.2) aad oa several similar vessels om the Step Pyramid 
complex at Saqqara (Laeau and Lauer 1959: pl. 25, nos 140-5) 


Ru) 


An ivoxy comb of Dict from Abydos shows a pair of outstretched wings and above then 
ûû faleon in a bark. This is the first known sepeesetation of a deity tvelling across the 
sky in bark, a common image in laler religious iconography (ef. Hornung 183:227). i 


Bary dynastic Haye 264 


may be assumed that the faleoa represents a cosmic deity, and more specifically the sun 
god ‘since the sun is the peincipal heavenly body that moves across the heaves" (Quinke 
1992:22). However, in the first wo dynasties it is possible that the won 7 was used lo 
denote the sun as an object rather than the name f a deity. Hence, the name of he 
“Second Dynasty King may be read as Nebr, ‘Lord of the sun’, rather than Raneb, ‘Ra is 
(my) lord (Quirke 199222). Otherwise, the earliest depiction of he solar dise in 4 
context where it may symbolise a deity is on a sealing of Peribsen Rom Abydos. Here, 
he sun dise appears hove The Sethranimal, possibly suggesting an associaion between 
he wo gels, perhaps even an early example of syncretism (Petrie 1901: pl. X11769. 

"A growing emphasis on Ru as the cenral deity associated with divine kingship is 
apparent during the Third Dynasty (cf. Quirke 1992.62), Imhotep, legendary architect of 
he Step Pyramid complex and chaneslior in the reign of Neterikhel, boce he tile wr- 
ımîfu ‘greatest of seers, held ftom the Old Kingdom onwaeds by he High Priest of Ra 
ûî Heliopolis. The construction of a dscoemted shrine at Heliopolis by Nejerikhet also 
suggests growing soyal interest in the cult centre of Ra, The name of Hesira, a high 
Oficial of he same reign, seems to indicate that fhe cult of Ra haf already atainad some 
prominence (Wood 1978:15). 


Saet) 


"Sule was worshipped fiom an carly period as the local godless of Eleplhuntine. The early 
shrine on Elephanine, which dates back 10 he late Predynastic period, is assumed 10 
have been dedicated to Sater from its foundation. This assumption is made on the basis of 
evidence from later periods, but cannot be proven, It may be signiicant that in Uternce 
439 (812) ofthe Pyramid Texts the king is deified with Satet 


sed 


The fashioning or dedication of a divine image of Sed is recorded on the Palermo Stone 
in regnal year +11 of Den The name ofthe god i determined by ‘a wolf or wild dog om 
ıa divine standard with a protuberance at he foot (the Atd-deviee) and a mace aeross the 
Sha (Brovarskî 10844) Since the same standard is sometimes shown seconpanying the 
King in representations of he Sol-festival, one author suggested a possible connection 
between the festival and the god (MLA. Murray 1904-4. The surme standard is also 
commonly identitîed with Wepwawet in later periods. Hence, it is possible hat Sed and 
Wepwawet are he same gol Wepwawet being ociginally an epithet of Sed but later 
becoming the main name by which he deity was known (Brovarskî 19844). 


Sahat 


"Seshal ras the godless associated with temple foundation eeremoaics - in which second 
keeping and measurement were important (Wainwright 1941)_and as such is atestel 
several ûmes in Early Dynastic sources, A temple foundation ceremony involving a priest 
Of Seshut is recorded on the Paleo Stone for year x+T of Den's reign. A granite block 
of Khasekhemwy from the temple area a1 Hicrakonpolis shows the king ‘stretching the 
cor, assisted by Seshat (Engelbach 1934). A simslar seene appears on a relief block 


fiom the teple of Hathor at Gebelein, dated stylistically to the late Second or eaely 
Third Dynasty (WS. Smith 1949: pl. 30). A fragment of a diorite cup roa beneath the 
Step Pyramid gives a theophorous name which may be compounded wilh the godless 
Seshat (Lacau and Lauer 1959:17, pl. 21 no. 115 


sem 


The local god of Naqada, Seth was closely associated with the king fron the period of 
ısuate formation. The link berween Horus and Seth in the person of the reigning king 
made explicit in the title bocne by First Dynasty queens, ‘she who secs Horus-and-Seth 
(erie 1901: pl. XXVIL129), The exotic and probably mythical Setlranimal is first 
ıanested on the Seorpion macchead, surmnounting one of the divine standards oan which 
lapwings hang. Here, it may symbolise either a provincial deity or an aspect 0f royal 
power. The Setiranimal may also be depicted, iogether with sheep, oa a First Dynasty 
pottery vessel (Habachi 1939.770; te Velde 1967:15). Seh is named on a privote stele 
om a subsidiary gave surounding he tomb of Djer at Abydos (Pete 1901: pl 
XXVIL96J: whilst a First Dynasty travertine bowl purchased in Qena bears a erudely 
incised inscription mentioning a festival of Seth (Ficrwiltan Museum E 3.1901). 

For reasons which remain uclear, Seth stained particular prominence in the late 
‘Second Dmasty, temponrily replacing, then joining, Horus as the god top the royal 
serek. The impoance of Seth in the reign of Perîosen is also reflected in a sealing of the 
King fom Abydos (Peuie 1901: pl. XXILI90). This seers 1o a god named ‘the golden 
one ox, perhaps mote likely, ‘he of Nubt (Naqada)’ the usual epithet of Seth in historic 
mes. Seth seems to have been adopted by Peribsen as his personal deity, and this close 
ıconneetion is emphasised in the wording of the laseriptioa: ‘He of Nubt hus handed over 
2) the Two Lands to his son, the dual king Peribsen'. The Horus Sekhemib-Perenmuat 
(perhaps the same King as the Seth Peribsen) also «ems to have expressed a close 
Comnectioa with he god Seth, A stone vessel fragment in the British Museum (BM 
S2862) shows the lower part of the serekh of SekhemibPerenmant and also the lower 
part of a divine fugue (Spencer 198042, pls 24, 26 [cat 277] The figure can probably 
be idenified as Seth by a parallel fragment on which the figure of Seth is fully preserved 
wand further dentilîed by the accompanying label, ‘he of Nube (Spencer 1980-42, pl. 26 
leat. 278]). The entries for Peribsen's predecessor oa the main Cairo fragment of the 
annals apparently lacluded references t0 Seth, ischding an estate or lemple of the god 
(hand copy by LESEdvards in the Library of the Faculty of Oriental Suudies, 
Cambeidge University). A late Secoad Dynasty inseribel sone slab ftom Helwan 
belanged 10 a royal priest called N-SE, ‘Seth is beautiful” (Saad 1957-51-3, pl. XXX 
Ino. 251). This is further evidence for he popularity of Seth at the time. 


smu) 
The name of Shu, a sky deity and a member of the Heliopolitan ennend of gods, was 
restored by Sethe (W.S. Smith 1949:1334) from the fragments of a decorated shrine built 
by Neljerikhet at Heliopolis. Otherwise, Shu is not attested until the Pyramid Texts of he 
late Fifth Dynasty. 


ary drastic iaymt 256 


Sobek 


The crocodile god Sobek was originally a water and fertility deity, and his peincipal early 
cult centre seems 1o have been in the Fayumn (Brovarskî 1984). On a seal-impressioa 
fiom Tarkhan grave 414, dated to the rei of Name, a sheine topped by a bucruniun is 
depicted together with crocodiles (Petrie et al 1913: pl. L4). A shrine of this form was 
luler asocated with he cult centre of Sobek at Medinet el-Fayum (ancient 
ShedevKıokodilopolis) and is used in the Pyrumid Tes as a determinative for this 
locality (Brovarskî 1984), The proximity of Tarklhun to the Fayumm tends to support the 
idenifieation, although another enwcodile god is later attested from the area of AKhmimm 
(Fischer 1964, n. 14); and a shrine surmounted by a bucraniurm is aot peculiar 1o he 
Fayum (Brovaskî 19Mb; n. 7) since it also appeurs to denote a cult cente at 
Herakleopolis (Pelvic 1901: pl VIL). Facing the shrine oa the Tarkhan sealing is he 
figure of a crocodile oa a divine pere with two projections issuing fromm is back. These 
ıa be ostrich feathers, û divine ateibute in Early Dynastic times (Petrie ef al. 1913-23; 
cf. Pere 1900: pls XXIX86, XXX). A ragmentary sealing from subsidiary tomb W33 
al Abydos, dating to the reign of Diet, shows several crocodiles, but they sre not 
idenitied explicitly as represenations of Sobek (Peuie 1900: pl. XXXIAD). An 
Jinseriptioa on a stone vessel ftom the Step Pyramid complex refers 10 hn Shk ‘servant of 
Sobek” (Lea and Lauer 1959:17, pl. 22 no. 117), and the same name of tile occurs on 
an incised sione vessel fom the tomb of Khasekhemwy (Armdlinesu 1902: pl. XXIL) A 
sealing fom the Shunct ez-Zebîb also mentions Sobek, though the context is unclear 
(Newberry 1909: pls XXV, XVID. 


Solar () 
Perhaps originally an cath and ferility god, Sokar became a mortuary deity becuse his 
cult centre wras near the Menmphite necropolis (Lurker 1980-113), I is possîele hat his 
festival was already celebrated during the First Dynasty, since several Sources record 4 
ırilwal involving a divine bark (see below, under ‘Religious festivals’) 


Sop 


In later periods, Sopdu bears the epithet ‘lord of the cast’, and it has been suggested that 
his cult originated 1a the Sinaî (CGodron 1990-163). The extival of Sopdu is recorded i 
Year 7 of Semerkhet, on he maln Cairo fragment of the annals. An inserîbed stone bowl 
rom Helwan, bearing the serekl of the same king, names Sopû (Sad 1969: pl. 32), The 
god is also attested in the carly Second Dynasiy: a sealing fom the tomb of 
Hetepsekhemy at Sagqara names a priest (i 1) af Sop, Per-neb, The insetiptioa 
also mentions the unidentified town of Ipu, ikely 1o be a cult cenwe of Sopdu, probably 
in ihe eastern Delta (Maspern 1902.189, type no. 5). Stone vase inscriptions itn beneath 
he step pyramid likewise mention Iput, in conjunetion with another priest (imn 7) 
called Ferea-ka (Lacau and Lauer 1950:18, pl. 22 nos 121, 122). A third priest of Sopds 
is mentioned in a moreorless contemporary, fragmentary inseription found by 
‘Amêlineau at Abydos (Weill 1908:196, no. 2; ef Given 1984: 1107). A plumed figure 
depicted on a wooden label of Den has been idenifed as Sopdu {Godroa 1990-58), 
hough this interprelation has not received general aeceptnce. 


Toth 


The fashioning or dedication of a cult image of an ibis deity—perhaps, though not 
necessarily, Thoth is an event attested in three consecutive reigns of the First Dynasty. 
Year x+3 ofthe reign of Djer, on the Cairo fragment of the sanal, records the dedication 
of such an image, as does a label of the succeeding king, Djet fiom Saqqara (Emery 
1954: fig. 105). A frsgmeatary label of Den from Abydos (Petrie 1900 pl. XIV.12) alas 
seems 10 record the dedication of an ibis statue. The existence in Predynastie times of an 
ibis cul is confirmed by the depiction of an Tels stapdanl on at least two late Predynustie 
palettes (Kaiser 1959:1225), Thoth certainly plays a signifîcant role ia the Pyramid 
Texts (lor example, Urterance 210 [§$126 1301), not lest as scribe ofthe gods 


Wadjet 
The Lower Egyptian counterpart 1o Nekhbet was Wadjet, a cobes goddess whose 
principal cult centre was at Buto. Uuterance 601 ($1671) of the Pyramid Texts associates 
Wadjet more precisely vith Dep, one of the ewin cities which comprised ancient Bulo. As 
we have seen, he earliest depiction of the Two Ladies’ is oa the ebony label of Aha fromm 
Naga. A scaling of Khasekhemwy from Abydos depicts a female figure holding at 
anl ia one hand and a large w3 sign in the other; she has been identified as an 
anthropomorphic representation of Wadjct (Petrie 1901: pl. XXIL 192). 


Wepuawet 


The jackal deity Wepwawet was, in later periods, the local god of Asyut, but probably 
played a more general role in Early Dynastic religion. In contrast to Anubis and 
Khentlameniu who are usualy depicted as recumbent jackals, Wepwawet is usually 
portrayed in a standing position (Logan 1990:64). A jackal standard is » cormmoa element 
lh Early Dynastic royal iconography, where tt is shown accompanying the King in 
religious rituals, royal processions and miliary expeditions, Amongst other Early 
Dynastic depletions of Wepwawer are sealings of Djer Ron Abydos (Petrie 1901: pl 
XV.108, 109), a sealing fiom fhe tonsb of Merneith (Petrie 1901: pl. XVIL135) and an 
ivory label of Den fromm Abydos (Spencer 1980:65, pls 49, 53, 1993:87, ig. 67} A 
frngmentary sealing fron the tomb of Den, on which the king is depicted performing an 
unidentified ceremony, shows what seems to be the standard of Wepwawet (Petrie 1900: 
pl. XXXIL39), The standing jackal may originally have been known as Sed, gaining he 
Epithet Wepwawel, ‘opener of the ways, in the Third Dynasty (F.D.Friedama 1995:5. 
cing a sealimpeession rom Beit Khallaf [Garstang 1902: pl. VII). As he name 
indicates, Wepwawet ‘opened the ways" before the king, not only those in Tife bur also 
ihe ways o the necropolis (Jonson 1990:53) Wepwawet was “leader of the gods and is 
sometimes shown sccompanied by ihe warlike rearing cobra (Iohnsoa 1990:53) One 
scholar suggested that Wepuwawet may have had a parlicular coanection vith he first- 
bom son of the king (Fruakfort 1948-71), whilst in he Pyramid Tels, Wepwawet 
appears as a manifestation of the living king (F.D. Friedman 1995:20). 


Barly drastic Hayne 28 


Other unnamed culkic objects atested in the Early Dynastie period 


HIPPOPOTAMUS: 


A sealing of Den fiom Abydos shows the king wrestling with a hippopotamus (Petrie 
“1901: pl. VILS-6), and the ritual hıepooning of a hippopotamus is recorded as he salient 
event of Den 's segnal year x*& on the Palermo Stone (cf. Millet 1990:58), The apparent 
prominence of the hippopotamus in Den's reign is hard to explain, and there is nO 
evidence that the later association berween the hippopotamus and Seth wras current in the 
Early Dynastic period. Moce plausibly, perhaps, The hippopotamus may have represented 
in more general terms he untamed and aggressive forces of natune which it was he 
lags duly, as upholler of the cosmic order, 10 control and suppress. A large limestone 
statue of a hippopotamus in Copenhagen (Ny Carlsberg Glyptothek) dates to the Early 
Dynastic period (Koefoed- Petersen 19514, pl. 1). Its size and material suggest that it was 
ıa cult stanê. A similar stone statue is in the Athens Museum (Cooney and Simpsoa 
176:203). Both examples emphasise the carly importance of hippopotamus cults 
"Several smaller hippopotamus figurines of glazed composition or potery have bees 
found in deposits of early votive objects (van Hnarien 1996:34, pl. 2). The hippopotamus 
Ji likely to have been viewed with awe in early times because of the threat it posed to 
fahermen and people crossing she Nile. The dediction of hippopotamus figurines in 

temples may have been acts of propitation, designed to gand against sueh 4 


PELICAN 


One ofthe cult objects carried in processioa on a label of Djer fiom Sagara is clearly a 
pelican (Emery 1938:35, fg. 8, pls ITA, I8.A, 1961:50, fg 21) The references to 
pelicans in the Pyramid Texts muy be signiiîcant in this regard, emphasising that the bind 
had a cutie symbolism in early times, No fewer than four separate Uterınces (226, 293, 
38, 387 [S226 435, 671. GRO]Y sefer to ‘the Majesty of the Pelican. Unerance 254 
(278) mentions ono different pelicans: The hrtpelican will prophesy, the ps pelican 
wil go up. Utlerance 318 (6511) states that The pelican is the king's mother , suggesting 
shat there may have been a connection between the pelican and the royal cult. 


ROYAL PLACENTA (?) 


One of the divine standards which frequently accompany he king on carly royal 
monuments apparently shows the (royal) placenta (Seligman and Murmay 1911 

Blsekman 1916-199; Rice 1990:109-10, 271-2) Ethnographic parallels for the worship 
ofthe royal placenta have been ited amongst the Baganda people of Uganda; the dite of 
his ribe are Hamitic in origin, and herefore supposedly share elements oF a common 
Hamitic beliefaystem with the ancient Egyptians (Seligman and Murray 1911; Blackman 
ı916 


SCORPION 


The frequent occurrence of the scorpion motif in royal contexts of the late Predyastie 
period (notably a rock-eut inscription st Cîcbel Sheikh Suleiman) makes it ikely that the 
Bimal held a special culic signifeanee for Egypt's rulers during the period of state 
formation, H may have been potent sybol of royal aggression. The relief decoeation of 
ıa stone vase Rom the temple sat Hierakonpolis inehsdes scorpioas, whilst model scocpions 
of glazed composition and stone have been found in a umber OF carly votive deposits 
notably Hierakonpolis itself (Quîbelt 1900: pls XVIIL15, 16, XX-10, XXILA) On he 
northernmost relief panel beveath the Step Pyramid, û scorpion is depicted behind the 
King, presumably in s protective position. The atribuies of the scorpio defy explanation, 
particularly the cylinder seals with which it appears to be equipped (FD Friedman 
195:19 fig. 12, 21, n, 107, ef 38 fig. 23). The seprpion standing on a ring depicted on 
he sela of Marka__fiom tomb S3505 at North Saqqera, dating 10 the reign of Qas 
(Emery 1958: pl. 39)_hus been interpreted as he cariest attestation of the seoepioa 
goddess Selket'Serket (on Kinel 1984; followed by Shaw and Nicholson 1995.262) 
However, given the similarities between he Merka scorpion and examples on he 
Nerjerikhet relief panels, he identitietion of the First Dynasty scorpion as an unnamed 
calle object seems more plausible, especially as Selket is no stestal by name until he 
Pyramid Teuts ofthe lue Fifth Dynasty. 


URAEUS 


The earliest representation of the royal urseus adoming the bro of the king is on an 
ivory label of Den from Abydos showing the King smiling a foreign captive, The 
Wepwawet standard which accompanies the King also has a uraeus i front of the jackal 
daily Gohnson 1990:40) (Note. however, that Me suthentieiy of this label has beet 
questioned [Johnson 1990:6], 1f i is not genuine, the earliest definite occurence of he 
uraeus would be in the mockeut scene of Neljerikhet in he Wadi Maghara, Sinai 
[CGardiner and Pout 1952: pl. 1, 19551) 


"Summary lis of deities and cult objects attested in the Early Dynastic 
period 


Anti, Anubis, Apis (Hap), Ash, Bastet, BalHathor, Deshret (the red cowa), Geb, 
Harsaphes, Hedjct (he white crown), Hodjwer, Heqet, Hocus, lallamet, Isis (7% 
Khenttamentîu, Kanun, Mafdct, Mehit, Min, Keith, Nekhbet, Osiris (7. Pah, Ra (4 
“Sule (2), Sed, Seskat, Seth, Shu (7), Sobek, Sekar (7, Sopdu, Thoth, Wadjet, Wepwawet 
hippopotamus, pelican, royal placenta (7), seorplon, uraeus. 


Religious fesihalt 


The eponymous event chosen to identify a particular regnal year in he Early Dynastic 
royal annals was often a religious festival, suggesting both that such festivals were 
Gammon st this period and that they were OF great inıportance in the life of the count (el. 
Emery 161:127) Apart from festivals of kingship, like the Sed-fesival and coronation 


Barly drastic Haye 260 


ıfimala, five other festivals are attested. Two of them are known fiom later periods, whilst 
he precise significance of the other tice eludes us. 


The ning of he Apis bull 


The running of the Apis bull took place at Memphis. The festival is recorded in regal 
year x12 of Den, year 2 of Semerkhet, and in two years (+4 and x+10) of Nineljer's 
feign. In addition, the running of the Apis is shown on a sealing of Den, and is recorded 
Jon two year labels of Qan from Abydos. The event could evidently take place more than 
once in a reign, slace the fourth register 0f the Palermo Stone records the second occasion 
ofthe muaning of the Apis 


The Palermo Stone seconds this obscure festival as the principal event of Den’s regnal 
year XS. I was also celehestel in year +14 of Ninetjet, and may perhaps have been 
connected in some wray with the goddess Nekhbet, who is also mentioned foe this year. 
The Diet festival seems to have been a securrent even, since the second oecasion of ils 
celebration is recorded in the annals. 


Ht 


The adoration of the celestial Horus’ is another obscure festival mentioned in the royal 
annals for year x*8 of the reign of Niner. 


The festival of Sakar (7) 


A label of Qaa from Abydos seconds the thind occasion of a festival iavolving a divine 
bark (Dreyer ct al. 1906:75), celebration also attested oa he Palermo Stone in year 5 of 
wan unidentified First Dynasty king, year x+6 of Den, and years +6 and x+12 of Ninetjer 
(eee Figure R.T), In later times, the most prominent festival involving a divine bark was 
hat of Sokar, god of ihe Memphite necropolis. A stone, perhaps a culkic image of the 
deity, was ‘dragged across the fields in a burque [sic] fixed to a slelge” (Lurker 
1980:13). A relief fragment fron the Step Pyramid complex whieh shows the King 
pulling a bark may depict the same festival (Firth and Quibell 1935, I: pl. 109.1 

Wis Smith 1949.137). The festival mentioned on the Palermo Stone was fist read as he 
‘Festival of Sokar' by Schafer (1902), and this interpretation has been widely accepted. 
However, fhe form of the bark shown on the Palermo Stone is ot the charsctefistic 
Henu-bark associated with Sokar (Aathes 1957:78). Rather, it beloags to a group of 
divine barks which includes he Manty-bark and the ters-Hr-boat of he king None he 
les, the Pyramid Texts make an explicit connection beewrezn Sekar and the Maaty-bark, 
so fhe festival recorded in the annals may indeed be a festival of Sokar (Gaballa and 
Kitchen 1969:14). In the reign of Nineter, the Sokar festival seems io have been 
celebrated at regular intervals of sîx years but ole O" Mar 1996:204). 1n subsequent 
dynasties, the festival may have become annual, since ils celebraion was no longer 4 


ıdistinetive enough evet to be used for dating purposes (Gaballa and Kitchen 1969:15 
1m 

The earliest depiction of a burk resembling the Hemu-berk of Sokar appears oa the 
Naqada label of Aha. However, the boat, shown in the first segister, appears 1o sail oa 
water, unlike the Sokar-bark which was drawn on a sledge. The device representing he 
King's name which appears behind the boat holds a hoe; his group of signs may record 
wan agriculkural site, perhaps ‘ancestral to (or related to) the later F hv-13 and performed 
by the King ata Sokar festival" (Gabala and Kitchen 1969:18). 


ar 


Another festival in which a boat played a major role was the otherwise unknown dlir- 
festival (the name is followed by 4 boat determinative), This is recorded just once, in an 
entry on the Palermo Stone corresponding 1o the early First Dynasty. The frequent 
depiction of boats on contemporary labels canphasises the importance of boals andlor a 
riverine setting for Early Dynastic rinuals This is not surprising in a county where he 
fiver ras the principal geographical feature, source of life, means of transport and artery 
OF communication. 


involved a sacred boat: (1) entry from the 
second register of the Palermo Stone, 


Barly drastic Haye 262 


referring to a year in the carly First 
Dymasty as ‘ihe year of the second 
occasion of the Djet-festival'; the 
hieroglyphic determinative suggests that 
this festival involved a boat (after Schifer 
1902: pl. D; (2) ivory year label of 
Semerkhet from Abydos, referring to the 
regular royal progress by boat (the 
“following of Horus') and another ritual 
denoted by a divine boat (bottom right- 
hand corner) (after Petrie 1900: pl. 
XVIL26); (3) a relief block fom the Step 
Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet showing 
the king dragging a boat, perhaps during 
the Sokar festival (after Firth and Quibell 
1935, I: pl. 109.1). Not 1o same sc 


SHRINES 


Upper Eyptlan and Lower Eyptlan archieetoral styles 


“The earliest shines must have been light-weight structures, builı fiom wooden posts and 
reed mating. This became fossilised as the “ideal type’ for temple architecture, and as 
Such was repeated in he more permanent medium of stone throughout Egyptian history 
until the very end of pharsonic civilisation (Kemp 1989.91-105. Aa actual example of 
such a building has bee excavated oa the low desert at Hierakoapolis, the postholes 
demarcatîng an irregular, oval-shaped enclosure (RL Friahrman 1996). The temple seems to 
have bee povided with flag-poles, confiming Ihe accuracy of reptesentations oa early 
labels and seslkimpressioas (for example, Pete 1901: pls IAS, X2) The later 
ypically show shrines of the ‘Sarifenbau' ype; that is, reed structures resembling hose 
built by she Marsh Arabs of southern Iraq up 10 modern times (Petrie 1901: pl. XVL 114, 
T16, 117; Kuhlmann 1996). In Egyptian texis form the Third Dynasty onwards, a shrine 
ofthis form is used as the determinative for pr-wr, fhe ancestral and archetypal shrine of 
Upper Egypt (Amald 1982) By contrast, the Lower Egyptian shrine, the prin or pr 
o is deplete as a more solid construction with a sounded or pitched roof. Examples of 
boll Gps may be seen, translated into stone, lining he Sel-fesival court of 
Negjerikhet's Step Pyramid complex, The origin of he two distincive types of 
architecture is lost in the miss of time. The postand-matllng temple exer 
Hierakonpolis sents to prove the existence of shrines of classic Upper Egyptian 
Predynastie Upper ERY. while the Narmer macehead and carly First Dynasty labels 
depict shrines of the Lower Egyptian type in a probable Lower Egyptian context. So, he 
iconographic distinction betwee Upper and Lower Egyptian shrine types may have some 
basis ia prehistory, rather han merely reflecting the Egyptian obsession with duality. 


“State vers local temples 


The few Early Dynastic shrines and temples that have survived and been excavated seen 
to be distinguished as stale oc local shrines by their architecture and decoratioa (or lack of 
decoration). 

Kemp (1989) has classilîed Egyptian temples according to the ‘formality’ of their 
ıarchiteeture; that is, how far thelr Jisign corresponds 1o the Ideal of temple architecture 
propounded by she royal court. The local shrines at Elepbantine and Medamud are 
hesecibed as ‘precformal’ and are characterised by their openness. They may be 
compared with he iconographic evidence from early inscriptions which ‘suggests that he 
barrlery at he temple eatranee were largely symbolic: only a smal pieket gate was showra 
in font of archaic tenmples” (Roth 1993:39), As we have seen, an open plan may have 
sulted the mıture of early cult activity, which seems to have put great emphasis on he 
carrying of divîne standanls and cult stalues ia procession, Oaly when provincial temples 
Were rebuil by the ste at the end of the Ol Kingdom did their architecture become 
‘formal’, reflecting the stylistîe dictates of the cour. 

O'Connor (1992) has put forward an alternative hypothesis; that is, that at least some 
Early Dynastic provincial lenmples were large and formal structures, the result of court 
initiatives. He argues ihat the chief Old Kingdom temple at sites such as Medamud, 
Elephantine, Hierskonpolis and Abydos has not yet been located and excavated; and that 
ihe temples at these sites discussed by Kemp, characterised as ‘pre-foemal', are minor, 
peripheral establishments (O'Connor 199284, 80). However, his argument seen 
cul to sustain, since extensive excavation on the island of Elephuntine has markedly 
failed to produce any evidence for another temple of the Early Dynastic period or Old 
Kingdom besides he local shrine of Salet (Seidlmayer 1906: 116-17), Here, Then, and 
probably at her sites as well, ‘the negative evidence for state sponsored temple 
onstruction. ..is very real" (Seidinayer 1996: 11% 

‘Temples in the provinces sehich show signs of state activity or soyal involvement 
‘seem, onthe whole, 10 be confined 1o sites connected wit the emergence and cology Of 
kingship or sles with royal residences nearby (Seidloraycr 1996: 116), Moreover, royal 
interest in selected provincial shrines seems to have been confined to the Fint and 
Sesond Dynasties (Seidmayer 1996: 118-19). In the Third Dynasty, there seems to 
have been almost no court involvement outside important stale cult centres like 
Heliopolis (although it must be seknowlalged fhut the Third Dynasty represents a 
relatively short period of time, and that cur evidence for ioternal developments is sparse). 

Together vith the soyal funerary establishments, state shrines la the provinces seem to 
have formed elements in a network of Early Dynastic court culture, They bound the 
provinces 1o the central administration both ideologically and economically, an in this 
espect may be seen as an early example of he administrative upparatus cnployed s0 
effectively in Old Kingdom Egypt and New Kingdon Nubia. On he other hand, ‘the role 
ofthe local cults as foci of persenal loyalty and as an expression of the collective identity 
of he local communities must be regarded as a genuine clement of Egyplian provincial 
calhure’ (Seidlrmayer 1996: 118 

Local temples and shrines seem to have been devoid of relief devoration. They were 
probably built entirely rons mudbrick, he monumental use of stone apparently being & 
oyal monopoly in he Early Dynastic period. By contrast, temples founded or ‘usurped’ 
by the state were either entirely stone built, or, more commonly, embellished with stone 


Early dynastic Haymt 261 


dlementa. These were carved with relief scenes depicting the rituals of kingship, 
especially temple foundation ceremonies and the Sed-festival. This essential difference 
belween local and state temples has been summarised as follows: 


Evidently, sate interests were pursued independently, without 
acknowledging he temples in their role as indigenous organisational and 
ideological nuclei of the local coramunities, and these shrines were not the 
places the kings chose to display their selaianship 1o the local gods as a 
tenet basie to their ruling ideology. Consequently, it was felt unnecessary 
1e adam the provincial sanctuaries with carve and inseribed arehitectural 
elements which would have offered the possibility 1o express such 4 
docine in visible and lasting fom 


(Seidlmayer 1996:1 19) 


Temple hullding 


Am eniy on the Palermo Stone for the seign of Den records the erection { J of an 
unspeciiied temple (ant-n 7, whilst a label of Qea from Abydos (Dreyer er al. 1996:75) 
is unique amongst year labels of he First Dynasty in that it mentions a building project: 

ıe foundation of a building called q3u-n rw: The sanals suggest that the foualatioa of 
ıa ew religious building usually comprised a more elaborate sequence of events. Three 
different ceremonies perhaps stages in the proccss are teconled oa the Palermo Stone 
for the same temple sun In, ‘thrones of the gods, during the seign of Den. The first 
ceremony seems to have been designated by the word A3, perhaps tadicatîng the initial 
decision 1o found a new ermple and perhaps the first planning phase (Eman and Cirapovt 
1929:8, definition 4). However, the main Cairo fragment of the soyal annals seenms 1o 
challenge this imerpeetation since it apparently records a second ‘planning’ of the same 
building smn r in the one reign. The terms K3 may instead refer to a ratual circuit of 
he building, perfomed by the king (Gaballa and Kitchen 1969:15, FD Friedman 
905:14). The annals also recon! the enuelal cesemony of p 4s, ‘stretching the col. 
whieh is customarily shown in temple foundation scenes, sueh as the relief block fron 
he Early Dynastic temple at Gebelein and he doorjamb of Khusekhemwy from 
Hierakonpolis. The stretching of the con represented the formal laying out of the temple, 
and accompanied the sanctifkcation of the land on which fhe temple was to be built A 
subsequent phase, wp-t, ‘opening of he (sacred) lake’, is recoded for the temple 
thrones of the gods’. For this building, the three ceremonies are recorded fof conseeutNe 
years. This indicates, perhaps, that the temple was not a particularly large one, since the 
Construction of a major bullding might be expected to have taken considerably longer. 

Apparently, it wras not necessary to accomplish (or to recon) all three ceremonies r 
every new temple. Early in the First Dynasty, aly one ceremony (3) is mentioned for 4 
temple called src rw ‘companion of the zods’, whilst in he early Third Dynasty the 
selcbing of the cord seems t0 have been ihe initial ceremony in the foundation of he 
temple qh ru, ‘refreshment ofthe gods’. 


Early Dynasile shrines 


The evidence for early temples is both epigraphic and archaeological (Figure 8), Two 
distine religious preeines st Buta, a complex with palm trees and the shrine of $ wt, 
sare well attested ın Early Dynastic inseriptioas and throughout Egyplian history but 
have not been located st fhe ski ixsel. Exeavations in the main temple area have not, s0 
r, revealed any material older han the New Kingdom. Likewise, the important shrine of 
Nelth at Sals js known to have existed in the Early Dynastic period but still awaits 
diseovery and exeavation. Some erly provincial shrines, like those at Tell Torshins 
Awad, Badari, Amant and Elphantine, do not merit a mention in the written reeord but 
sare known through thelr surviving archaeological remains, which indicate very modest 
saruetures (Kemp 199:688). 1n the case of important cul centres sueh as Heliopolis, 
Abydos and Hiecakanpolis, discoveries through excavation have confirmed he 
epigraphic evidence for the iıportance of these shes at an early period of Egyptian 
Bory. 


Elephanine 


‘Elephantine is he only site in Egypt where, thanks to a lueky combination of 
circumstances, the development of a provincial sancuary can be followed from 
protedynastic limes onwards” (Seidlrmayer 1996b: 115. The earliest shrine on the island 
OF Elephantîne has been uniquely preserved, tanks to its unusual location. i ras sirunted 
ina natural niche becwreen s group of large boulders, to he north of the cary setlement, 
Suceessive rebuildings and enlargenmenis requised more space, and so filled ia the site of 
he early shrine, building over the top of the boulders. The structure of the Early Dyaastie 
temgle and many of the votive objects deposited there survived (Dreyer 1986: Kemp 
989.6074). The first structure to be built comprised two small mudbriek chambers, 
whieh appear to have been designed to protect and shield the sanctuary holding the cult 
image. This was presumably housed st the very bek of the niche, dirvetly beeen two 
of the boulders, ln front of these two small rooms, a courtyard, possibly roofed, was 
created by enclosing the space with further cick walls (Kemp 1989:70, f. 23) 
Alhough Prelynastic pouery was found within the shrine, the snwall mudbrick buildings 
Which formed the earliest shrine seem to dte 10 he Early Dynastic perio (Kemp 
1989:69), During The first half of the First Dynasty, rmodilications 1o the adjacent fortress 
impinged directly upoa the shrine, sestuicting the space in the forecourt As a resul, the 
entrance to the shrine had 10 be moved to the north, A subseqvent strengthening of he 
fortified wall further reduced the area of the shrine forecourt Indeed, the actions of he 
Early Dynastic state showed wilful disregard for lecal religious practices, and the 
community shrine was entirely neglected by the court in favour of a soyal cult installation 
on the southern part of the island (Seidimayer 1996b: 115), Towards the end of he 
Sesand Dynasty, Ihe expansion of the town led to the apundoament of the ianer 
fartifîctios. This allowed the shrine to expand once again, regaining its former extent 
Further expansion of he sacred enclosure took place during the Third Dynasty and early 
Old Kingdom (Kaiser er al 1988:1352; Ziemann 1903) 


Early drastic Heyret 66 


Figure &8 Early Dynastic shrines and temples. The 
map shows the sites at which Early 
Dynastic religious buildings are known to 


have existed, based upon archaeological 
andlor inseriptional evidence. Capitals 
denote ancient place names. 


ı4 large collection of votive material was recovered from the floor of the shine. Many 
of the pieoes may be datal to the Early Dynastic period (Dreyer 1986:30-153; Kemp 
1989:72. 73 fg. 24). Figurines of animals and humans in glazed composition form the 
most numerous group of objects. Animals represented include babooas, frogs and 
Crocodiles. A particularly common type of votive offering consists of an ovalshaped 
fhience plaque wilh the stylised head of a hedgehog at one end: 41 examples of his 
range object have been recovered front the shrine. None of the objects gives at 
indiation of the deity worshipped in the shrine. In ter times, he sancmary is known to 
have been dedicated to Sate, local goddess of Elcphantine, but it is possible that the 
Predynastie and Early Dynastic periods witnessed cule practices of a more genel 
nature. These may have focused in particular on the phenomenon of the annual 
inundation (Husson and Valbclle 1992:94) since, according to later beliefs, the waters of 
he inundation were believed 1o well up from s subterranean caver beneath Elephuuntine. 


Elah 


The temple at Elkab, presumably dedicated to the local goddess Nekhihet, received royal 
patronage at the end of the Second Dynasty, in the form of a stone building erecied by 
Khasekhemwy. A carved grunlte block bearing ihe King’s ame was found during 
exeavaions at the beginning of the twentieth century but was subsequently lost (Sayee 
and Clarke 1905.239 Tuo additional fagments showing human figures in lou reliel 
were found st the same time, but their present whereabouts are also unknown. Further, 
uniaseribed granite blocks still standing in the same spot just laside the northern cone 
ofthe Great Wall, confirm the location of the building (Hendriekx and Huyge 189:13), 
din all probability û small shrine or temple. 

The results of archaeological investigation in the main temple area indicate that a 
sacred building stood there Roma Early Dynastic limes. Oa the she of the existing temple 
Ruins, excavations failed to reveal any domestic setlement material later than the Early 
Dynastic period, suggesting hat the slte was demarcated as û sacred area prior t0 he Ol 
Kingdon (Sayce and Clarke 1905.262), Being on a slight cievalion, the temple site 
would have been prominent above the surrounding area (Sayee aad Clacke 1905-262) 
and herefore ideally suited to a ssered sole. 


Hierakoapolis 


"The early ewentiethxcentury exeavators of Hierakonpalis found the remains of a circular 
mound in the centre of the large sectangular enclosure within the walled town of Nekhen 
(Quibell 1900:6, pl. IV: Quîbell and Green 1902: pl. LXXID. A revement of rough 
sandstone blocks enclosed a mound of clean desert sand. This structure has been dale 1 
the Early Dynastic period (Hoffman 1980-131; Kemp 1989-75) and probably served as 
ihe foundation for 4 temple, which, like its peedecessor on the low desert plain, is likely 


Bary drastic Heyret 68 


to have been a reedeandpost shrine, The revetment itself probably symbolised he 
primeval mound, upon which, secording 1o Egyptian mythology, the falcon Horus had 
frst alighted A pavement of compacted carth, reinforced by sough sandstone blocks ia 
he areas of greatest wer, extended frum the base of the mound on all sides, but 
especially 10 the southeast (Quibcll and CGrcen 1902:7) There were also the remains of 
tough limestone column bases or pedestals for statues, the exact function of which is not 
clear (Quibell and Green 1902.8; ef. B.Adams 1977) Excavations in 1960 coafirmed that 
ihe sene revetment enclosing the mound of cle sand and the associated paved area date 
to the period of slate formation. The remains of a door socket suggested that ‘access 10 
he plitform had been controlled by a gate or door’ (Hlotiman 1980-131) Two parallel 
wall trenches and three post-holes indicated he existence of a building some 2 metres by 
1.5 meres, cilher comtemporary with the pavement or slightly earlier. N is tempûng 10 
identify the building as an early shrine made of posts and reed mating, perhaps even the 
pcr, the archetypal shrine of Upper Egypt (Hoffman 1980.132), 

‘The temple of Horus was the location of the famous Main Deposit’ a colloetion of 
votive objects probably buried some time in the New Kingloaa: no oly did the deposit 
lie immediutely beneath an carly New Kinglom temple, it even contained an Eighteenth 
Dynasty scarab and sherd (Kemp 1968.155). This makes accurate datiag of uninseribed 
objects from the Main Deposit’ extremely dificult (ef. B.Adams 1977). The most 
important carly objects, he commemorative palettes and maceheads, bear witness to the 
patronage bestowed on the cult of Horus by the firs Kings of Eaypt The fact that Kings 
ike "Seorpion and Narmer dedicate such important artefacts in the temple emphasises 
ihe pre-eminence Of the local god, Horus of Nekhen, as the deity intimately associated 
with divine kingship. Long aller Hierakonpolis had lost its status as a centre of poliical 
importance, the presence of a temple to the supreme god of kingship ensured continued 
royal patronage: a number of stone elemeats with the name of Kntsekheax(vry) probably 
derive from a temple or shrine, perhaps siuuated on the cireular mound, One block shows 
ıa temple foundation scene (Engelbech 19384). The construction of houses during he 
"Second and Third Dynasties appurently encroached upoa the carier temple, ‘leaving the 
mound rising above he new secumulatlon” (Quibell and Green 1902:59 

Outside the rectangular enclosure, Green found a large Himestone statue, much wom 
and damaged, but recognisably carly ia style and comparable 1o the colossi Irom Copies 
(Quîbell and Green 1902:15). The statue is cylindrical in fom and represents a man 
wearing a long, ofFhe-shoulder cloak. The figures lef arm is held honZoatlly across 
he chest, wiaile he right am, greatly elongated, hangs close to the side of the body. The 
ight fist was perforated, perhaps 1o hold a mace of oiher object, as seems to have been 
he case with the Coptos colossi (Kemp 1989:81, fg. 28). The gure was evidently 
shown in the characlenstie sen striding position typical of ler representations, with the 
left leg slightly advanced. The knees are crudely indicated, again a feature found in the 
Coptos eolosst. An Mentitîcation of the sturwe has not been established, but the piece 
clearly indicates the iıportance of the temple at Hierakonpolis at the very beginning of 
FEayptian history. 

In a radical reinterpretation of the carly monumental architecture at Nekhen, the large 
rectangular enclosure has been daled 10 he First Dynasty by its architecture and 
comparisons with he funerary enclosures at Abydos (O'Comor 199285). Despite 
srateraphic evidence that the circular revetment supporting the temple mound pre-dates 


he enclosure wall by a considerable period of time, O'Connor prefers to see the two 
serwenures as roughly comtemporary. He interprets the enclosure as a royal cult complex 
(ef. Roth 1903.39) and the Early Dynastic palace gateway as the cnirance to a second, 
adjacent enclosure. A mound of sand is reeoasuucled within this second, purely 
hypothetical enclosure, based upon traces of sand found during tae course of very limited 
test excavations (O'Connor 199287} Despite the lack of supporting evidence, 
O'Connor's arguments do emphasise two inponant points: the similarity in layout 
between he temple of Hicrakonpolis and a royal ritual precinct (Setdlmayer 196b: 117) 
and the way în which royal interest in the tersple of Horus at Nekhen at the end of the 
Sesond Dynasty changed he nature of the empl, and in all probability the nature of 
worship at Hierakonpalis, The constructioa of an enclosure wall around the carly temple 
probably served 1o exclude persons of insufficient status. The Early Dynastic state 
embellished the shrine of the god of kingship with new stone buildings, but the price was 
restricted access The temple building activity attested for the reign of Khasekhemmwy at 
Gebelein, Elkab and Hierakoapolis clearly indicates considershle soyal interest in the 
provincial remples of Upper Egypt This development may be coaneeted with he 
beginning of the some system of provincial administration, and perhaps reflects a 
progrunme to consolidate central government contol of he national economy through 
ihe institution of local temples. Selkimpressioas of the Second or Third Dynasty fom 
the temple precinct at Elkab mentioa an "inspector of the granary of Elkab (van de Walle 
1954) and illustrate the economic inmportance of local 1enmples in the Early Dynastic 
period ss storage centres for agricultural produce (Seidimayer 996b: 118). The fruits of 
ihereased state contol of the economy cun be seen in the reign of Khasekhernwy's 
successor: the construction of Nejerkhe's Step Pyramid complex represents sn 
unprecedented marshalling of the county's resources, chuanelled into a project of he 
royal court 

"On the low desert 1o the west of the tom of Neken, the large ceremonial centre 
dating buck 1o carly Naqada II (RLFriedman 1996) spparenily remained is use up to the 
beginning of the First Dynasty. 


Gebelein 


A limestone block with relief decoration from the temple of Hathor at Gebelein indicates 
he existence of an Enely Dynastic shrine st the site (Curt 1953: Galassi 1955:64 85) 
The bloek, now in Turn, was found during Schiaparell's excavations in 1910 (Curio 
1953:105; Donadoni Rover 1990:24), An unprovenanced companion piece in the Cairo 
Museum has been strbuted to the Gebelcin 1emple, in view of the close similarity of the 
1imestone ss wel as the style of the relief (WS Senith 1949-137, pl. 30) 

The temple of Hathor was siuated on the nohem edge of the soutbem hill at 
Gebelein (Donadoni Roverî 1990:23, fig. 3.1) Uafurtunutely, Sehiaparelli's excavations 
were very poorly documented, so further ioformation about the early Hathoc temple or 
he exact cireumstances in which the decorted block was discovered is licking 
(Donadoni Roveri 1990.234) 

The Gebelein reliefs undeubtedly date to the late Second or carly Third Dynasty, 
though a more exact dating is dificult. Similarities to the Heliopolis reliefs from the 
seign of Neljerikhet sugges an carly Third Dynasty date (WS Smith 194:137) 


a 


However, he Turia block shows slight peculiarities in style, which may sinmply reflect iis 
provincial origin or may indicate an earlier, Second Dynasty date (W.S Sith 1949:1370 
$ ef. Seidimayer 1906: 116). Both blocks appareatly depict a temple foundation 
ceremony, perhaps the foundtion of he Hathor temple sel. On the Turin block he 
ısriding figure of the king caries a bundle of four staves in his ight hand. On the Cairo 
Companion piece he is shown driving these stakes into he ground. The closest parallel or 
this subject mater is he granite block of Khasekhemwy fromm Hierakonpolis, suggesting 
hat the Gebelein blocks, 1oo, date fiom the lte Second Dynasty. ln common with he 
‘surviving fragments of relief decoration rom Khasekhemmwy's other buildings in Upper 
Egypt the Gebelein block in Turin alludes 1o the festivals and ritual activites of divine 
kingship. A figure below the King wears a curious wig and holds the tail of the King's 
leopund-skin garment, deails whch are paralleled in Fifth Dynasty seenes of the Sed 
festival (N.S Smith 149:137). A boat associated with the ceremonial prwgress of the 
king, the inns-H. is also depicted, 

The reason why a King of the late Second Dynasty should have founded or re-founded 
a temple at Gebelein remains something of a mystery. The site clearly supported & 
flourishing community in the late Predynastic period, bul it does not seem to have played 
ıa particularly important par in the process of state formation, neither does it emerge ss & 
major Early Dynustic centee. The temple st Gebelein was dedicated, at lest in later 
times, to Hathoe, one of the mythical divine ancestors of the king, and this conection 
“with the royal cult has bee suggested to account for court interest in the site (Seidllmayer 
Io06b: HE). However, as we have seen, Hathor_as distinct from Bae_is not directly 
ıanested until the Fourth Dynasty and, in any case, there were probably other early cult 
Genes of Hathor besides Gebelein. Rather, Khasekhemnwy's involvement at Gebelein 
seems 1o be part of a pattem of royal building at provincial shrines in soudern Upper 
Fort 


Amant 


A temple foundation deposit dating to the threshold of the Early Dynastic period was 
discovered during excavations in the west forecout of the later temple at Amant 
(McEuen and Myers 194029). The deposit comprised the remains of wo large Early 
Dynastic pottery vessels, some sand and squeezes of mud. These last may be accounted 
fer by he fact that an carly temple would almost certainly have been constructed of 
ımudbriek (McEuen and Myers 1940.29). However, no walls were discovered, indicating 
hat the early temple was probably swept avray during later building activity. 


Copies 


“The temple at Coptos was exeavated by Petrie at the end of the nineteenth century (Petrie 
1896). From the published report, i is dificult to establish the size or relative location of 
he earliest building. Neverheless, several largescale tone sculptures, including he 
famous Coptos colossî (Payne 1993:1213, pls I-IV, Va, b; Dreyer 195b), indicate that 
ıa temple probably stood af the sive from he lae Predyastic period. The three calossi 
‘hemselves ‘lay beneath the thick sand bad of the Piolemaie temple’ (Pevie 1896-7) 1t 
was not possible o date them precisely by strstigraphie meas, but on art historical 


rounds they have been assigned to the late Predlymastie period or carly First Dynasty 
The carvings oa the side of fhe colossi include the saws of saws ~an alternative 
ısuggestioa imerprets these motifs as branches or fronds of foliage (Dreyer 19950: S1 
and Pervceras (Lamhis) shells, emphasising the close connection between Coptos and 
ihe Red Sea, The early ipatance of Coptos derived fon its strategic location st the 
hend ofthe Wadî Hamnurmat, vhich served as the principal route bexwreen the Nile valley 
and the Red Se coast 

Other large stone sculptures found by Petrie at Coptes coalirm the existence of a late 
Predynastic 1emple at the site. These included the figure of a bind, peobably an archaic 
falcon (Petrie 1896: pl. V.6), and tree lions (Pete 1896: pV). Particalarly sigaiticant 
for the dating of he animal sculptures is the mention of "New Race’ (in other words, 
Predynastic) pottery which was fouad at the samme level (Petrie 1896:7) The bird and 
Ions were erudely finished by hammering (Petrie 1896:8) und belong to a class of large: 
scale animal sculpture from the period of state formation. They seen to confim that he 
Egyplians of the late Predlynastie period already worshipped deities as large cult statues 
erected in temples 


Abydos 


Excavations at the beginning of the twentieth century uncovered substantial material 
from an early shrine witin the later temple of Osis at Abydos (Peuse 1902 Two 
aspects of the archaeological evidence are worth diseussing separately: the architectural 
semains of the shrine selk und the deposits of votive objects, anuny of which may date to 
he Early Dynastic period. 


THE EARLY TEMPLE BUILDINGS 


Peteie's excavations revealed a jumble of walls, representing numerous building phunses 
of he early temple, delicated 1o the local jackal god Khenttamentiu, The lowest walls 
probably belonged to ıemple buildings of ihe Early Dynastic period (Kemp 197b: 30) 
Royal patronage of the temple can certainly be irseed boek to the beginning of the First 
Dynasty. A fragment from 3 vase of glazed composition decorated with the serek of Aba 
was found by Petrie adjacent to a pit of votive objets. I is also possible hat several of 
he large ceremonial paletes fro the late Predynustic period including the socalled 
Butleeld, Libyan, Hunters’ and Bult paletes_were found in the temple area at 
Abydos, and this would take royal patonage of the site even further bek (Sayee 
898:99; Legge 1900-130, 133, mowmote) 

Petrie published plans of he temple buildings over the course of the fist three 
dymasties and he offered » reconstruction of the temple's development (Peuie 1903:7 9 
and pls LLI). The early history of the Abydos terple area vras reexamined in delail by 
Kemp (1968) He found that the effet of Perie’s sırstigraphic assumptions had been 10 
dale many of the walls too early. Furthermore, the cowpler mass of iaolaled wall 
fragments poses gest problems for reconstructing complete buildings and foc 
esablishing the relive date of the numerous building phases. The earliest temple 
building (Kemp's building H) seems to dale to the Old Kingdom, although it overlay 
walls and sand beds which probably belonged to an earlier building, one perhaps as old as 


Fary dynastic taymt 2 


he First Dynasty (Kemp 1968150). The diseovery of small twists of burnt clay beneath 
building H supports ils entification as the early temple, sinee similar objets were 
discovered in an apparently Early Dynastic deposit beneath he New Kingdon temple at 
Arment (Mond and Myers 1940.29). Based upon conmparisoas writ the large rectangular 
enclosure at Nekhen, the existence of royal cult enclosure a Abydos has been proposed 
(O Cannar 1902:89]. However, I is hard to see why a complex of this Kind would have 
been located within the carly town when the immedistely adjacent area of low, desert was 
he chosen location for several such enclosures. 


DEPOSITS OF VOTIVE MATERIAL 


“Tiree deposits of Early Dynastic votive objects were found by Petrie in the temple area at 
Abydos. The most important collection of votive material came from a pit designated 
chamber M69. The fear of chamber MEO was covered with a thick mut of organic 
mater, embedded within this layer were the votive objects, comprising Ivory and fnienee 
figurines, and numerous bead (Petrie 1903:23). Tuo further deposits of discarded votive 
objects (MSA, M6S andl MSS) were discovered nearby (Pevie 1903:26-7). The majority 
ofthe material fron these pits was dated o the early First Dynasty oa the basis of similar 
material Rom the Hierkonpolis Main Deposit’ 

‘However. a se-examinton of the complex stratigraphy in the Abydos temple area has 
shown that chamber M64 probably dates to the ently New Kingdom, while chamber MGS 
Could have been dug st any time fom the Old Kingdom t0 the Eighteenth Dynasty 
(Kemp 1968.153). However, while not all ihe objects are necessarily Early Dynastic, 
some of the votive material discarded in these pits is clearly carly in style, such as the 
ivory lion “gaming pieoes' 

Sfmilar votive malerlal was found scattered within the temple area iıself (Petrie 
1903:28), Paricularly important is the group of human heads, modelled in clay. One of 
ıhe pottery heads looks distinctly Asia (Petrie 1903: pl. XL251), whilst he appearance 
of another (Petrie 1903: pl. X260) hus antraced comment from several scholars (r 
example, Rice 1990). I is very un-Egyptian in style, and the headdress, in the fom of a 
mufban, i reminiscent of depictions of Sumerian deities. The gure has been denied as 
ıa Mesopotamian, but whether human or divine is not known. The presence of such an 
object in the carly temple at Abydos eaises fundamental questions about Egypt's early 
relations wilh js caster neighbous, and the extent o which early religious iconography 
was influenced from abroad. 


Balani 


There is some evidence for the existence of an Early Dynastic shrine at Badarî, on a 
finger of low desert called Spur 3. Undervesth mudtxiek walls of the Old or Middle 
Kingdon and New Kingdom, idenifiel as successive phases of a small local temple, 
here was a stratum of Early Dynastic debris which iself overlay some unidentified tê 
Predynastic or Early Dynastic mudbrick structures (Brunton 1927:18-19). Four objects 
found f slav provide the best indications that an Early Dynastic shrine did exist on he 
sie of he later temple. A finely finished eup of deep Blue glazed composition, very 
SSirilar in form 1o a copper example found in the tomb of Khasekheawy a Aoylos, may 


have been donated as a votive object at an Early Dynastic shrine (Brunton 1927: pl 
XX61) The temple area also yielded he upper part of a pottery figurine, depicting & 
bearded man with a broad face and a curious, shoulderclength wig (Brunton 1927: pl 
XXL). ln general style, the figurine is reminiscent of sinilar objects found in the Early 
Dynastic temple at Hierskonpolis. A silstone falcon of arthaie appearance (Brunton 
1927: pl XX6) quite possibly represents an Early Dynastic cult object (cf. Brunton 
1927:17). Anti, the local god of the Badari segion_—who is attested from at least the 
‘Sesand Dynasty was worshipped in the form of a falcon, and i is possible taut he 
siltstone statue was an image of the god. Finally, a bird's head, in pink pottery wit ‘litle 
lumps of potlery added to represent he eyes (Bcunton 1927:17, was also found in he 
temple aren (Brunton 1927: pl. XK62). Alhough dificult to date, it may be Early 
Drastic and can also be interpreted as a votive offering to the local falcon god. 


Heliopolis 


Fragments of limestone relief fiom a «mall shrine were found within the ancient 
enclosure at Heliopolis (Weill 1911-129), they are now in the Egyptian Museum in 
Turin (W-S.Smith 1940:1337, figs 48-53). The building ions which the reliefs came 
was badly destroyed but it wras probably a small shrine. The decoction appears to be 
connected with the celebrate of a Sed-lestival and may also have shown he 
Heliopolitan ennead, the group of nine gods involved in the Heliopolitan creation myth 
Tuo fagments bear the name of the king, Nejerikhet Another frugment shows the King 
seated with the ladies of his family gathered around his feet (WS Smith 149:133, f. 
4. The women are shown as tiny figures, two (lhe king's daughter and the queen) th 
front of the king's legs, and a third (whose name is illegible) behind with her anı around 
his leg. An unpublished fragment roan the Heliopolis shrine shows 


ihe seated king wilh clenched hands held to his breast, one of them 
grasping Io staves and he other perhaps the fail A small attendant 
places his hand on the king's elbow This would appeur to be the scene 
Where the king is seated on the Heb-Sed throne while one of he oficiants 
sarranges his dress 

(WS Sith 1949:136) 


A fragment of fine limestone relief in the Cairo Museum may also have come from the 
same shrine at Heliopolis (WS. Smith 149:136). On one side the king wears the tight 
firing garment sociated with the Sel-festival, oa the other side he wats the red crown. 
The beginning of royal patronage in the temple area at Heliopolis suggests official 
support for the local solar cult, which subsequently became the major state cult in the 
Fourth Dynasty. 


Tell rabin Awad 


The site of Tell Torahim Awad in the norlveastem Delta has been the focus of 
excavations since he late 180s (van den Brink 192b), In the last few seasons, a nuniber 
of deposits of potlery and votive objects have ben found beneath the foundations of he 


Barly dynastic tay 4 


Middle Kingdom temple (van Haurlem 1995, 1996). The deposits of offering-potety 
probably date to he lle Old Kinglom or early First Iotermediute Period, but the non 

ceramic material is likely to be rather earlier, Some of the smal votive objects of glazed 
composition, ivory and stone have close parallels Roan the Satet temple at Elephantine, 

suggesting tht the Tell Ibrahim Awad objects are also Early Dynastic in date (van 
Haarlem 1995:46). The largest deposi of votive muterial, discovered in 1996, comprised 
some 212 items, Unique objects included an ory» of glaze composition, a diorite palete 
and he figure of a dwarf made from comelan. In total, the number of early votive 
objects recovered so far fromm Tell brahim Awad equals the collection fom Elephantine. 
Moreover, Tell Torahim Awad is the only documenied site north of Abydos where such 
material Kas boen found to date. Excavations in 1996 resched the deepest termple strata, 
just above he watertable. They have been dated preliminarily 10 the end of ihe Early 
Dynastic period oc carly Old Kingdom, and must represent the building where the Votive 
objects were originally delicuted (van Hanelem 1996:32). Tell Torahimm Awad is the only 
example of an Early Dynastic provincial shrine yet excavated îa the Delta. 


Bue 


Excavations in the late 1980s at fhe site of Tell el-Fara'in Buta in the north-wester Delta 
have revealed mudbvick buildings of the Early Dynastic period which may have served a 
callie purpose (von der Way 1903288-9). The complex which dominates he Early 
Dynastic level exeavated so far consists of a labyrinth of corridors and interconnecting 
rooms (von der Way 1996), At the hear of the building lie two roms, in one of hese a 
fimestone platform stood against one wall. Hs original function remains a mystery, 
ıalthough the excavator suggested that it may have supported a throne or statue (von def 
Way 1992:7). The peculiar layout of the building as a whole would seenı to indicate that 
it served a special purpose, perhaps as a royal residence or a building associated vith the 
royal cult. An adjacent building, dated to he reign OF Narmer, may also have served « 
sacred purpose. In font of a simple, rectangular building, large potiery vessel had been 
Sak ito ihe gfound. On ihe iside of the vessel mo stylised bull figures had been 
marked n he wet clay (von der Way 1989.295, fig. 121-2), giving rise to the suggestion 
hat he vessel was perhaps a feeding uough for s divine bull wohipped at But (see 
Figure £9 A wooden label of Aba fromm Abydos offers possible confirmation for this 
theory. The label apparently sevens the King's visit to important Delta shrines (Petrie 
1901: pl. IIA.S; Emery 1961: fg. 12) The second register depicts a» roundtopped 
ısanetuy surmounted by a bird, almost certainly he shrine at Buto known as} wf (Gee 
below, and Figure 8.10) 1n front of this shrine is a bull inside an enclosure. I the same 
1ocation applies to both shrine and bull, i suggests the worship of a sacred bull at Buta in 
the early First Dynasty. 

The moûif ofa sheine with a rounded or pitched roof surmounted by a bind, depicted oa 
he Aha label, is first atested on the Narmer macehead from Hierakonpolis (Quibell 
1900: pl. XXVIB). Here, the shrine is shown behind ihe enthroned king. The fact that 
Narmer is shown wearing the red ctown rmay be significant, perhaps indicating that the 
event depicted took place in Lower Egypt (Millet 1990:54, 56). A bone label 


Figure &.9 Early cult at Buto, 1: the sacred bul 
Indications of a bull cult practised at Buto 
in the Early Dynastic period: (1) a 
rectangular mudbrick building, excavated 
by the German Archaeol 
expedition to Tell el-Fara‘in/ Buto in 
1988; in front ofthe building, which dates 
to the very beginning of the First Dynasty. 
ıa large pottery basin had been sunk into 
the foor (after von der Way 189:284, fig. 
7.J; (2) the pottery basin was incised on 
the interior with two schematic bulls, 

iving rise to speculation that it may have 


Barly dynastic Hayrt 6 


served as the feeding trough ofa sacred 
bull kept at Buto (afer von der Way 
1989.295, fg. 12.12; (3) wooden label 
of Aha from Abydos recording a royal 
visit to the north-western Delta; the 
enclosure with a bull may refer to a sacred 
precinct at Buto, if the heron-topped 
Building next to it represents the Djcbaut 
shrine (after Emery 1961-52, fig. 12). Not 
o same scale. 


fiom the lale Predyaastie tomb Uj at Abydos shows a similar motif, consisting of a 
seclangular, panelled building with a fat roof, surmounted by a Iag-beaked bird, 
possibly a heron (Dreyer 19936: pl. 7) An dentical label sras exeavated i the 1omb of 
Aha (Petrie 1901: pl HIL.12). ln an eniy on he Palermo Stone for the reign of Usekak, a 
hieroglyph showing a heron on a perch is used as the determinative for the placename 

"$ wt (Sehiifer 1902:34). This loealiy is mentioned in he Pyramid Texts, an has been 
securely identilîed as a sacred area in the vicinity of But (Ciauthier 1929:1 27; Eman and 
Gnpow 131:561; Faulkner 1969.327). is perhaps noteworthy that the same heron-on- 
acperch hieroglyph (Gardiner 1957: sigerlist G32) is also used as an Ideogram or 
determinative in the verb $ hi ‘to be inundated. This may have an ancient connection 
wil ihe marshy, inundated nature of the land around Bute. The significance of the bird 
shown atop the shrine is not clea, but possibly the sancwary at 2 wt was dedicated to 
he worship ofa heroa deity. 

"A second feature of he saeted landscape at. b wulo recorded on carly inseriptions 
was a complex conprising buildings and palm trees either side of a wavy canal (Hietak 
1904, plus references), Two identical labels 0f Djer, one from Abydos (Amdineau 1904: 
pl XV.19: Lege 1907: no. 4 [Berlin 18 026) and one from Saqqars (Quibell 1923-6, pl 
XL2-3; ef. Weill 1961:3517, record the visir ofthe king to this place. The samme localicy is 
shown on relief fragments fom a number of Old Kingdom royal monuments, in 
conjunetion with the heroa standard of bw whilst a virally idenuical scene rom he 
Palace of Apries at Memphis (Petrie 1909.811, pl. VI; Mogensen 1930. pl. Cl; cf. Weill 
1961.351) clearly identities the locality as_ > wt. Judging from similar scenes in Old 
Kingdon peivaie tombs an. the Nev Kingdom Theban tommb of Rekhmira, i is possible 
hat a palm tree was originally planted 1n font of each shrine, and that the apparent 
galnematioa of shrines and palm trees on the Djer labels simply reflects the conventions of 
Eyplian anisie representation (Bietak 1994:3). Several different interpretations have 
bee offered for the buildings snd palm wees at Buto: chapels, house-burtals or tempocary 
buildings erected for a specific royal occasion (Wallet 1962114-28; H.Alenmlller 
T95: Bietak 1994:5. 


O 


کے 


Mall arm FEL 


5 4 چ 


Figure 8.10 Early cult at Buta, 2: the Djebaut shrine. 
Depictions of the distinctive shrine 
surmounted by the figure of a heron: (1) 
bone label from tomb U-j at Abydos, 
dating to the late Predynastie period (afher 
Dreyer 1993: pl. 14j); (2) similar label 
from the tomb of Aha at Abydos (after 
Petrie 1901: pl. HIL.12); (3) the shrine as 
shown on the ceremonial macchead of 
Narmer from Hierakonpolis (after Quibell 
1900: pl. XKVIB); (4) detail from a label 
of Aha recording a royal visit to the north- 
westem Delta (after Petrie 1901: pl. X-2) 
(5) the name of the Djebaut shrine as 
recorded on the Palermo Stone, in an entry 
for the reign of Userkaf (after Schãfer 
1902:34). Not to same scale. 


The discovery of tree pis in front of an Early Dynastic mastaba at North Saqqara (Emer 
1949:73) and the excavation of similar pits ln froat of late Middle Kingdom tombs at Tell 


Bary dynastic taye 


ıed-Daba tend to favour the interpretation of he Buto complex as a sacred cemetery, 
perhaps the burial place of the Predynastie rulers of Buto (Bictak 1994), 

‘Exeavations at Buto have proved the site's importance from carly Predyynastie times. 
“The artertion pid by Early Dyaastic kings, especially those of the early First Dynasty, 1o 
he various sacred precincts ar Buto sugges {hat fhe site may have played a key ole in 
he process of stale formation, and that due reverence for hs temples was an important 
part ofthe programme designe o cement and strengthen the unity of Egypt. 


Sa 


A label of Aha apparently reads a visit by the king to the shrine of Neth (Petie 1901: 
pl. IIIA 5, Emery 1961 fg. 12) Since the other moti on he label suggest » Delta 
location, it is ikely that the cult cenre of Nelth was already located at Sals in the north. 
weste Delta. This was the site of s rmsjor temple to Neklh in later periods of Egyptian 
history (ef Licbtheinm 198036-41), alhough no evidence or an Early Dynaste building 
has yet come 1o light from Sals itself (Presumably, the Early Dynastic levels now ie 
beneath the water-table, a they do at nearby Bulo.) 


PART III 
THE DIVERSITY OF 
LOCAL EXPERIENCE 


CHAPTER NINE 
THE RISE OF URBANISM 


Egypt during the first three dynasties wras not the monolithic state the royal court may 
have wished it to be: there was signifieınt local and regional variation. The pace and 
character of urbanism is one of the areas in whic this variation is most discemible 

An urban centre may be defined as “a geographical and cultural central place 
exercising regional politcal control, vith a relatively large and dense population, 4 
complex division of labour, and internal social stratification" (Hofînan er al 198:175) 
The migration of people Rom small, scattered villages to larger, more densely populated 
semlemenls marks a fundamental change in he nature of society (Kemp 1995-687) 
Urbanism ihe coacentratioa of population in such setlements_is sn important stage in 
he sauctural evolution of a state (cf. Hoffman 1980-310), reflecting he *imerictioa 
between central organisation and local communities’ (Seidlmayer 196b: 127) 
Consequently, urbanism is one of the defining charseterisics of complex societies, and of 
early states i particular, The process of site formation in Egypt seems 1o have been 
accompanied by the nucleation of settlements in several areas Of Upper Egypt (Kemp 
TTT; FA Hassan 1988-161) The process is direelly atested by the rapid expansion of 
ceran setlements, and is also seflceted in the mortuary recon by the simultaneous 
abundoament of several small cemeteries in a single region. The best evidence for these 
ıphenormena comes from the Abydos region, Naqada and Hierakonpalis. 

When calculating changes in the size of ancient populations i is important to consider 
selement density as well as setllement area. For example, at Hicrakonpolis tightly 
packed houses exeavatsd within the walled town enclosure suggest a high deasily of 
senlement during the Early Dynastic period; this is ikely to have offset any reduction in 
Selement aren during he period of ste formation (cours Trigger 1985-348) The 
evidence from all areas of Egypt points towards a process of permanent, if gradual 
ıurhanisatîon (contr Janssen 1978-216. 1 is likely taut the majority of the population. 
who were farmers, hen as novw-renained dispersed in hamlets and smal villages" 
(Trigger 1985-34): but, i The light of significant recent excavations, Egypl, even early 
Egypt, ean no longer be considered ‘a civilisation without cities (Wîlson 1960). 


FACTORS INFLUENCING URBANISM 


The factors affecting the beginning of urbanism are likely to have been several, and to 
have varied according to local conditions (Trigger 1972, 1985) especially the ‘politieal, 
cultural and regional seting’ (Seidlmayer 1996: 126) The growth of large tours ik 
Upper Egypt at the end of he Predynastie period may have been partly for defensive 
reasons (Trigger 1984:103), although it doubdess faciliuted central control of the 
population by stale authorities {Seidlmayer 196b: 113). The nucleation of settlement at 


Hierakonpolis may have been the result of climatic andioc ecological factors (Hoffman 
116:41) What is clear is that urbanism both selected, and was made possible by. the 
large-scale changes which took place within Egyptian society during the Predlyrastie 
period. Increasing social stratification, the production of agriculrural surpluses and the 
edistibution of these resources by the local dite enabled a sectioa of the populatioa to 
become engaged in fulltinme non-agricultural activily. The trend of craf specialisation 
was undoubtedly fostered by the demands of the dlite and ukimately encompassed the 
development of writing and the growth of a literate seribal clase engaged in 
administration. No longer tial to ihe land, a signilîcant section of society could now 
Benefit fiom living and working in a more compact foc of setlement. Sueh a move 
would have been particularly advantageous to a nascent administration, allowing f 
more effective central storage of agricultural produce, Even after the unification of Egypt, 
local arisiocracies_such ss are atested, perhaps, by the élite Fist Dynasty mastabas ai 
“Tarkhan and the Third Dynasty mastabas at Belî Khallaf may have continued t0 exext 
significant influence over their communities, and this fictor should alsa be bome in mind 
Shen considering early urbanisation (Kemp, personal comauaication) Furthermore, the 
sole of cult cenwes in the beginnings of urbanism should not be overlooked (Trigger 
1972:5001; Hoffman 1980307-8). The site of a local shrine would have provided 4 
natural evs for activity, parieularly if the local dilte depended upon iatimute 
association with the supemalural 1o maintain is authority. The archaeological evidence at 
Hierakonpolis suggests that the location of an impomant shrine was one of the factors 
responsible for he grown of the early town (Honan 180:307). 


Reglonal differences 


Fundamental though it was, urbanism did not take place simultaneously in all regions of 
Eaypt (Kemp 1977-196, 198). N appears to have begun in Upper Egypt, where socie- 

economic change had been most rapid and where the process of stale formation was 
initiated. Hence, the earliest domestic mudbcick architecture has been found at 
Hierakonpolis and Naqada (Peuie and Quibell 1896; Weeks 1971-2, The leading centıes 
of Predynastie Upper Egypt. Based upon the available evidence, the settlement pattern in 
Middle Egypt seems 1o have been less affeeted by changes ia late Predynastic society. 

However, his apparent siuuatioa ray reflect the poor preservation of archaeological sites 
in Middle Egypt_due to geological factors, encroachment of sand dunes from the 
estem desen, and the movement of the Nile chumnel_ruther than the true exteat of 
urban development in the region. Throughout the Nile valley, he major seltlements 
appear 10 have been located on he west bank of the iver. The spparent absence of 
Slenifieant sites from the west bank in Middle Egypt has undoubtedly influenced our 
yiew of the region; it may have been mote flourishing in ancient times than the surviving 
evidence suggests. Indeed, uil he dates of foundation of important later centres ke 
Hermopalis and Herakleopolis have been established, we will remain ignorant of early 
urbanism in Middle Egypt. A reference 10 Herakleopolis on the Palermo Stone, in an 
entry dating to the reign of Dea, suggests that the own may have bee founded before 
he First Dynasty. On the east bank of he Nile, in the Matmar-Qau region, there is lle 
evidence foc the growth of urban centres until the Old Kingdom, when administrative 
developments connected with the royal court resulted in the gtowth of eLEuanis 


Barly drastic Haye 2 


(O'Connor 1972934). The demography of he Memphite region was undoubtedly 
dominatad by the foundation of Memphis itself, marking ihe imposition of central 
authority and coatrol by the new national administration, There is increasing evidence 
ha urbanism was well advanced in the Delta in lle Predynastic times (contra Janssen 
1978:2169. Recent exeavations have demonstrated the importance of sites like Boto and 
Mendes in the Prelynastic period (see below, whilst other centres such as Sals and 
Bubastis are likely to have been sîgnificant before the incorporation of the Delta ino a 
unified kingdom (Kaiser 1986-1071). The appearance of mudbriek architeetuee ia Delta 
ıserlements (van den Brink 1989; Wilkinson 19960: 95) is likely to mark a fundamental 
Change ia the structure of Lower Egyptian society (von der Way 1993.96) and probably 
indicates the incorporation of the regioa into an expanding Upper Egyptian polity ‘Fron 
his moment the spread of urbanism in the north could well have beet closely parallel 10 

vat in Upper Egypt (Kemp 1995687). The variable pace of urbanisation ia different 
regions of the country emphtsises the importance of local fictors in the peocess of state 
formaon (Wilkinoa 1996: 86-90). 


Topographical and ecological factors 


The most favoured location for settlements in Egypt, in ancient times as today, would 
have been the oodplain of the Nile. The river provided ot only supplies of fresh vraler 
but also the most ecient means of transport und communication within the country 
(O'Connor 1972:79) However, Ihe alluvium was prone to inundatioa, and it would 
therefore have bee preferable 1o locate setlements on raised areas of land, beyond he 
reach of the oodwaters. ln Upper Egypt, Predynastic sedlements developed oa isolated 
hilloeks oc abandoned levees within the foodplaia, or on the margins of the low desert 
"The majority of early setlemments whieh were loeated within the fioodplain now lie under 
deposits of alluvium, and are covered either by fields or by modern towns and villages. 
Ae a resulk, few setlements have been excavated ia Egypt, compared t0 the numerous 
cemeteries which lie along the desert edge and which are therefore much mece accessible 
to archaeologists. In the earlier phases of the Predynastic period, marginal setlements at 
ıa mumber of sites, notably Hierakoapolis, spread back into the desert, following the edges 
of major wadis until the limits of cultivaton were reached (Hotfnan 1980-148). These 
deseredge communities would have depended largely upon herding, the savannahs of 
ihe now arid low desert providing pasturage for locks. The desiccation of these 
pasturnges following the end of the Neolithic subpluvial, accompanied by a change 1o 
hgriculaure as he principal subsistence base, probably led to he Widespread relocation of 
selements to the flocdplain. This may account for the demise of Mandi torarls the end 
ofthe Naqada II period (see Chapter 10). The settlements that remained at the edge of the 
culivatîoa are lkely to have been “functionally rather specialized (O'Connor 1972.79; 
ef. RFriedman 1904.322), perhaps serving as administrative or symbolic centres, like 
Naqada South Town, However, with very few exceptions, it is such desertedge 
ıseltlements That have been stuliel in detail. is important 1o remeber this bias in the 
evidence when examining carly urbanism in Egypt We must admit that, 1o date, our 
wpieture of urban development is far fron conmplete. Within the general senting of the Nile 
valley, the rst urban centres seem to have developed in lecations <fivored by their 
overseas trading possibilities and by their economic hinterlands" (Bietak 1979:1290) 


Chapter 10 explores the rolê of geographical and ecological factors in the growth of 
important regional centres. A settlement located at a strategic point in the course of the 
Nile _ such as a natural constriction of the valley (for example, Memphis), o¢ an 
intersection between fhe fiver and desert routes (perhaps the early town of This would 
have been in a poskion to control trade, and to function as an entrepût for goods. 


FUNCTIONS OF EARLY TOWNS 


The centralising tendencies of the early Egyptian state, especially the sedistrîbutive 
economy which funded state peojecls, were doubtless important influences oa the 
beginnings Of urbanism in the Nile valley, They rmay also have had a direct effet oa the 
character of early towns, Many of he earliest urban centres were surrounded by a large 
mudbriek wall, defining and resuicting the area of dense habtusion (Elephantine, 
Hierakanpolis and Naqada are all examples), The defensive role of town enclosare walls 
may heve extended beyond protecting the inhabitants from aggressively jealous 
Marauders. Walls may also have been intended to control access 1o and provide security 
for he sadministrstive and economic centres bested within early owns (Trigger 
985:348). A redistributive econoeny must have required a network of centralised stocage 
facilities where agricultural produce could be collected for redistribution to the 
population, a proportion being fetained as buffer stocks and some being channelled 1o the 
central treasury. These storage facilities would have required adequate protection, and are 
ikely to have heen located within towns. The evidence from Naqada South Town points 
to he setlemet having served just such a purpose (see below). It hus even been 
suggested that regional urban centres were not primarily concentra of population but 

father, state foundations serving as locations for shrines and convenient nodes for the 
Operation ofthe centeal administration. If so, the inhabitants of early Egyptian towns may 
have been principally state officials, erafismen employed by the royal workshops, and 
priests in other words, specialist not engaged in agriculture (Trigger 1985-848). As he 
Early Dynastic period progressed, the ineresing economic demands made by the royal 
court on he cduntry as 4 whole.-1o fund iacreasingly elaborate building projects 
resulted in a widespread process of urbanisation, urban centres eventually functioning as 
the backbone of Egypt's political and administrative organisation” (Seidimayer 19960: 
127), State interference, if it may be characterised as such, wras also manifest in another 
area: the foundation of planned seulement. These are well attested from the Old and 
Middle Kingdoms, but state acliviy was also important in the foundation or growth of 
earlier tours, such as Elephuntine. By contrast, serlements like Hierakanpolis owed their 
existence more to local andor regional socio-economic developments (Seidlmayer 
Toseb: T27) 


THE EVIDENCE FOR EARLY URBANISM 


Comparatively few setlements have been systematically excavated in Egypt. This state 
of aflhirs is the result of wo main factors. Firs, the changing aims of archaeology and 
ancient histocy have influenced, 1o a considerable degree, the types of she lavestigated. 


Early drastic Haymt E 


Uil he later half of the twentieth century, the primary aim of archaeologist working ia 
Egypt was often the sequistion of artefacts for museums and peivate colieeions. These 
were 1o be found in abundance in the numerous cemeteries of all ages whieh lie along he 
dase edge. Archaeological activity was therefore primarily focused on cemeteries, and 
on he visible monuments of pharsonic Egypt royal tombs and temples, An important 
exeeplioa was he work of Myers at Anant, unfortunately eut shot by ouside 
circumstances, The excavation of tombs and temples suited an age of scholarship which 
viewed Egyplian history from the perspective of the royal court. Social and economic 
history, an attempt o understand the experience of ordinary Egyptians in antiquity, has 
become a major academic concern only 1 the last thirty or so years. As resul, interest 
in Egyplian setlemeats__which coastinute the primary souree of evidence for economic 
wand social history, sdeninistrative hierarchies, pattems of socio-economic organisation, 
and the daily life of the general populationr_kas increased dramatically, and excavations 
are now underway af several setlements fiom various periods of Egyplian Bistocy: 
Sesond, he location of seltlements in Egypt has hindered their archaeological 
exploration. As we have seen, the majority of ancient towns and villages wil have been 
located in ihe floodplain, at sites which are now imecessible due to modem land-use 
activities, the accumulation of alluvium, or chunges in the course of the Nile. These 
factors limit the number of settlement sites which are readily seeessîble to scientific 
investigation (although the Dutch East Delta Survey revealed a rge number of Old 
Kingdom setlements lying benesth the elds, not far below the surface), Furthermore, 
he earliest setlement levels of sites in the alluvial floodplain lie close to or beneath he 
ıwatertable. Excavation of such sites is virtually ieapossîble without pumping equipanent 
(Mendes is a recent exezption). This has been used 1o grent effect st Bulo in the norih- 
western Delta, and we may expect other setlemeat sites Iying below the watertable to be 
wexeavated in the fuuure (for example, the Early Dynastic city of Memphis) 

In the absence of suflicient direct evidence for urbanisn, scholars have ofien tummed to 
the cemetery record {O'Coanor 1972-80: Mortensen 1991). The lcation of a cemetery 
provides a sessoaable, though by no means infallible, guide to the location of ils 
Secompanying setlement, Likewise, the size 0f a cemetery gives an indieatioa of the size 
of setllement it served; the disuibution of cemeteries has been used 10 reconstruct 
settlement patterns ia various regions and st various periods (for example, Patch 1991, 
Seidlmayer 1996b: ig. 2. The conspectus of sles presented below draws upon both 
yes of evidence for early ufbanism actual settlement material, most of iv excavated in 
recent years, and Early Dynastic cemeteries for which the accompanying setlement has 
hot yet been located o¢ excavated 


Elephanine 


Excavations oa the island of Elephantine have revealed a continuous picture of urban 
development fiom Predymastic times. ln the Predymastic and Early Dynastic periods, he 
ısouher part of the island was divided into wo, at least during the annual inundation. 
The selement was located in the centre of the eastern island. The earliest habitation is 
now dated to fhe end of Naqada Il, although a few isolated finds of carlier material out of 
context may indicate that the settlement had already begun at fhe beginning of Naqada I1 
(Seidlmayer 1996b: 111). The arrangement of post-holes suggests an open setlemment of 


seal huts (ef. Leclant and Clerc 1994430). The original extent of the Predynustie 
ıseltlement is hard to guuge, since only limited areas have been excavated. The seulement 
may have been restricted to the noqher par of the land, with a cemetery occupying the 
Southern pa but i is also possible that the early village may have bec much larger 
(Ziernann 1903:1415: Seidlmayer 1996: 111. The habitation area certainly extended 
‘eastwards towanls the river bank, where overlooked the main navigation route through 
he First Cataract area. The first ınudbrick buildings were constructed on Elephantine at 
he very end of he Predynastie period (“Dynasty 0}. Alaa at this time, industrial activity 
is aested: an oven with pieces of slag and traces of copper indieutes that metalworking 
took place within the Predynastie seulement (Leclant and Clore 1994:430). 

The unification of Egypt st the end of he Predynastic period, secompanied by the 
imposition of a mutional goverment apparatus on the whole counly, marked a deckive 
urming-polnt in ihe history of Elephantine. At the beginning of the Fist Dyust 
probably as the direet result of royal policy, 8 fortress ras buil on the island. Its strategie 
location was clearly designed to facilitate control of river traffic on the main river branch 
sand the monitoring of activity in the area of cultivable land on the east bank of he Nile, 
dhe site of modem Aswan (Ziermann 199332, fig. 12; Seidimayer 1996%: 112) 
Moreover, he prominence of the building wrould hve emphasised to the local iahabitants 
and to passing traffic the oennipatence of the central, royal government, The fortress 
seems 10 heve been built a6 par of a change in Egyptian policy towards Nubia, a policy 
whieh now became hostile and exploltative. Certainly, fhe construction did not benefit he 
eal community nor did it take account of local sensibilities. Nether he existing 
ıselement nor is shrine was included within the fortifîeations; the fortress Was rected in 
he opûmun location, with sent regard for the preexisting buildings (Seidleuyer 
1996b:112) When the forifietion was strengthened and extended during the first half of 
he First Dynasty, he new wall ran so close to the focecoun of the local shrine that the 
shrine's enieanee had to be moved. As he result of a subsequent strengthening of he 
Wall the shrine focecourt hal 10 be further seduced in size. The averse impact of he 
fortiîcaion programme oa he religious Iife of the local coamnmunity paints 4 none-too- 
beneficeat picture of the early state. The construction of the fortress on Elephuntine 
Jîlustrates the poliical dominance of the royal eourt after the unification OF EYP 

At the beginning of ihe Second Dynasty the setlemeat and shrine, which had 
previously been unenclosed, were fortified by means of a double wall eonecting with the 
Bastion ofthe forcress, This new town wall and the outer sectioa of the forifications were 

rengthened several times over the suceceding decades. Eventually, towards the end of 
ihe Second Dynasty, the expansion of the town led to the abandonment of the iner 
fortifications, This allowed the shrine to expand once again, regaining ts former extent 
Early in fhe Third Dynasty the sralls of the old fortress, now surrounded by hubitutions, 
were levelled o form a coinuous setlement area. None the less, a sealing of he 
govemor of Elephantine from the reiga of Sekhemkhet gives he town the determinative 
ofa fortress, indicating that Elephantine was still viewed as a fortifhed setlement, at least 
By the ceniral govemment who had built he fortifications in he first place (Phzniek. it 
Kaiser eral 1905-181; Seidlmuyer 1996%: 113). 

"Until the middle of the Third Dynasty, settlement activity was confined to the easter 
island. This was to change with the construction of a large complex of buildings on he 
orher granite Fidge of the weste island some ime during or afer he reign of 


Bary drastic iaymt 6 


Nejerikhet (Seidlnuyer 19964, 1996:1204) The eamplex was enlarged and reinforced 
during sa series of building phases, Late in the Third Dynasty, the courtyard area between 
he norhera and southern grınite ridges was filled and levelled, 1o support a new 
building. This development coanected the original building complex on the northern 
ridge 1o tbe small step pyramid constructed on the southem ridge in the reign of Hunî 
The size and construction of the entire complex distinguish it Rom other contempecary 
buildings on Elephuntine, and mark it out as an official, statecsponsored project 
(Seidlmayer 1996b. 120). This is confirmed by the associated finds, especlally seal. 
impressions. Most significant is a sealing from a papyrus roll giving he title of the ‘royal 
ıseal-hearer of the prs from the reign of Sanakh. Even if this official sras not himself 
based at Elephantine, the consultation of a eourt document oa the island indicates hat he 
Third Dynasty complex was associated with the royal domain Other sealing: indicate 
hat food distribution operations were carried out on the site, coafirmed by the vast 
quantities of breadmoulds and beer jars recovered, The excavator concludes that he 
building was an admiistrtive centre coanceted with the royal estate and notes that it 
was located ‘in a coavenient place near the river and in he vicinity of the cukivable 
ıalluvial land accumulatîng to the north (Seidlnnayer 1996b:121). I is quite ikely that the 
Complex on the eastern island at Elephanrine was connected with a fundamental 
sesmcturing of the administration under the last Kings) of the Thin Dynasty, « 
development which paved the way for the unprecedented huummessing of resources evident 
in he pyramid-building of the Fourth Dynasty. Elephantine is thus a key site for the rise 
ofthe Egyptian state and ic bears witness 10 the changes whieh marked the transition Hon 
he Early Dynastic period to the Old Kingdom. 


Enab 


The significance of Elkab fiom the period of state formation onwards is demonstrated 
bol archaeologically and ioonogrphically: by he numerous graves of he lte 
Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods; and by the adoption, a fhe very beginning of the 
Early Dynastic period, of the local deity (Nekhbet) as the tutelary goddess of Upper 
Egypt and, ter, as an element of the royal inulary (Vandersleyen 1971:35) 

Fxeavalions a the turn of the century (Quibell 1RSEb, Sayee and Clarke 1905; Clarke 
1921), and by successive Belgian missions since the 1940s (vermeersch 1970; 
Vandcrsleyen 1971: Huyge 1984: Hendrickx and Huyge 1989; Hendrieks 1993) have 
revealed several settlement and cemetery areas (Figure 9.1). The ancient site of Elkab is 
mostly contained within 3 large rectangular enclosure wall of mudbrick, name the Cireat 
Wall by the early exeavators. Within this outer enclosure are sievated a smaller, walled 
temple enclosure and the partial remains of a curved, double wall (Hendriekx and Huyge 
1989: pl. I) which may have enclosed the carly tow (Vermeersch 1970323). The 
double wall must originally have demarcated » roughly circular area, conforming to the 
hieroglyph for ‘lows. Becuuse of the northranl movement of he river channel since 
ancient mes, the southwestern half of the ancient town has been eroded anf is nou lost. 
However, here is some evidence that the torn extended westwards beyond the 1inits of 
he Greal Wall. At he end of he nineteenth century, there was ample evidence of 
habilalions, outside and westward of the western line of the Great Wale (Clarke 
921:56. A few years later, a section of the curved double wall and large amounts of 


ancient pottery could be seen exposed in the Nile bank (Sayce and Clarke 1905.263: 
Clurke 1921:50) 

The location of the urge, lue Predlynastic (Naqada I1) cemetery (Hendricks 1993) 
whieh would Rave lain ouside the setlement indicates that the carly town lay in he 
southwest comer of the later, rectangular enclosure wall. The limited amount of 
archaeological material excavated withia the curved double walls seems 1o coafirm this 
area as the hear of the ancient tour, The only architectural evidence consists of small 
mudbriek constructions. The Hoor of one chamber was covered wilh sherds of Early 
Dymastic pottery, and s large jar had been sunk into the ground. Numerous Mint objects 
found here provide further cvidence of early occupation (Vermeerseh 1970), Similar 
material (pottery, Mints, ffagmeats oF stone vessels), some of it dating back to he 
Predynastie period, was excavated st he beginning of The wentieth century in a trench to 
he east of the temples (Sayce and Clarke 1905.259). This location would correspond to 
he edge of ihe probable ancient 1own sine. Unforruntiely, more extensive evidence of the 
ıearly oceupetioa at Elkab is unlikely to be forthcoming, since appears that much of he 
sile was thoroughly 


Figure 9.1 Elkab. Confirmed Early Dynastic features 
within and around the later rectangular 
town wall (after Hendrickx and Huyge 


Early drastic Haye E 


198910-14, pl 1I). Key: 1 possible, 
locaton of a Predynastic cemetery; 2 
building of Khasekhemwy; 3 Early 
Dynastic tombs; 4 late Predlynastic 
cemetery; 5 double wall, enclosing the 
early town; 6 excavated areas of the Early 
Dynastic iow. 


levelled at the ead of the Early Dynastic period oc perhaps during the Old Kingdom, for 
he construction or recoastructioa of the temple compound (Vermeerseh 1970.33: 
Vandersleyen 1971:35). Moceover, a substantial 1own mound within fhe curved double 
walls, noted ia an early century account, was removed by sebakh diggers ia he 
ninetceath century (Clarke 1921-56 61). On the spot where the temple now stand, 
xeavations failed to reveal any domestic setilement material later than the Early 
Dynastic period. This fet suggests that 1h. site was regarded as holy from an early period 
(Sayee and Clarke 1905.262, However, domestic vessels (‘asljars') of Predynastic date 
indicate that the site was probably not sanctified until aer he oemation of the Egyptian 
stale (Sayee and Claıke 1905.2623) 

There is only limited datable evidence of Early Dynastic activity in the Eikab region. 
One of the stairway tombs (No. 6) excavated at the end of he nineteenth century just 
ouside the nor.wester side Of the Crest Wall contained a sectangular stone pale, 
Characteriic of the carly First Dynasty (Quîbell 1898) From the end of the First 
Dymasty ere are Iwo rocl-eut inscriptions of Qa (Huyge 1984). Both show the royal 
serek cing a figure of the local goddess Nekbet. One nscıiptioa is carved on a roek 
in he Wadî Hellal, the other at a she some 12 Kilometres downstream. A small stealite 
plaque bearing the name of the Second Dynasty King Nebra was reported to have come 
fiom another of the stairway tombs (No. 2) (Quibell 18988), The existence of a stone 
building of the lute Second Dynasty, just inside the nortbern comer of the Cîreat Wal 
indicated by a number of granite blocks, one of which (now lost) bore the name of 
Khasekhemwy. 

There are several cemeteries of e Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods at Elkab. 
“The principal Predlynastie cemetery, dating to the period of state formation (Naqada HI), 
ies within the Cireat Wall and seems to have formed part of a more extensive cemetery, 
he original extent of wibich is difieult o establish (Hendrickx and Huy ge 1989:12 (24 
Hendriclos 1993). Tombs of the Early Dynastic period are somewhat beter represeated at 
Eikab, ln partieular, the existence of several higl-statas burials indicates the early 
importance of the own, A group of small mastabas dating to ihe Second and Third 
Dynasties was excavated adjacent to the inside norl-westem edge of the Great Wall, 
close to the granite blocks of Khasekhenmwy (Sayce and Clarke 1905.239; Hendrick and 
Haye 1980-12). Aihough thoroughly plundered, the burials seen to have belonged to a 
larger cemetery comprising also some carly Old Kingdom mastabas (Sayee and Clarke 
1905.242). There are skelchy reports of further Early Dynastic graves having been 
uncovered in the elevated pant of the enclosure north of the temple; and here were 
apparently a few carly burials vitin fhe maialy Middle Kingdom cemetery to the east of 
he temple ares (Sayce and Clarke 1905-46) 


Hieralon 


Excavations at Hierakoapalis since the end of the nineteenth cetury have revealed much 
ofthe site's history. Towards the end of the Predynastic period (Naqada HI), he newly 
founded town of Nekhen, situated at he edge ofthe cultivation, swiftly became he mais 
regional centre of population, replacing the more seatlered desert settlemenls 
Characteristic of the earlier Prelynastie period (Hofman 1976:41, Kemp 1977:198) 
Previously extensive, these had declined 10 an aren of just 2 hectares by the beginning of 
the Early Dynastic period (Hofman «r al. 1986). This marked contractioa of settlement 
seems to have bee purl of a more Midespeead phenomenon associated with he rise of 
‘Mrhanism (Kemp I989 The town of Neken had not, however, been founded on a virgin 
sile: deep soundings indicate an unbroken sequence Of settlement material, dating back 1o 
he Badarian period, beneath the Early Dynastic and Old Kingdon town (Hoffman 1987) 
Moreover, Prellynastic burials were found within the town enclosure (Quîbell and Gree 
1902.2. 

"At the beginning of the Eaely Dynastic period, with the inauguration of the new capi 
sity at Memphis, Hicrakonpolis was relegated 1o the status of a mere provincial capital 
Nevertheless, the close involvement of Hierakoapalis in the process of state formation 

nû the song ideological links between he local god Horus and Kingship ensured the 
town's continuing importance. This is mest spectacularly atested by the excavation of 
part of a large building, interpreted as a royal palace, in the centre of Nekhen (Weeks 
1971-2). A monumental gateway, decorated with elaborate niches, provides the frst 
ıexample of this distinctive architectural style in u secular building, and seems to confi 
he validiny of the seem ‘palace facade’. The Early Dynastic date of the gateway is 
confirmed by the fact taut Old Kingdoms houses were built over it (B.Adams 1977) Three 
seakimpressions found within the gutevray have been dated to the late Second or early 
Third Dynasty. although the elaborate nature of the niche decoction suggests 4 First 
Dynasty date. Behind he gateway lay an assortment of residential and administrative 
buildings, including a number of storesooms, alhough it is not certain if these 
constructions are coatempocary with the palace itself. Reasons for identifying the 
galevray as part ofa palace include its locarien within an urban area, its monumental size, 
and he clahocare nure of its exlermal appearance (Weeks 1971-231; see O'Connor 
T92 foc an alternative interpretanioe) 

At some point during the Early Dynastic period oc carly Old Kingdom, a rectangular 
towa wall was built around Nekhen (Kemp 198030) Comparisons wilh other sites 
support an Early Dynastic date for the wall, whilst clay-sealings of Netjerixhet and Khaba 
found within some of he houses indieıte Early Dynastic occupation. Within the town 
enclosure, the buildings were tightly packed and Ihe Iowa must have had a high 
population density. also sens 1o have been characterised by funcional patteming, 
With diferent quarters for different activities. This indicates a degree of town planning, 
whether coaselous or unconscious (Bietak 1979.108). Alhough he walled own of 
Nekhen became the main centre of population from the beginning of the Early Dynastic 
period a potaherd lacised with the serek of Namer was found witha the town ares 
(Garstang 1907: pl. 3.1; B.Adams 1995:124) some settlement endured in two ‘outliers 
uni the early Old Kingdon (B.Adams 1977 Hierakoapolis remained an important town 
into he early Old Kingdon, but declined thereafter following the establishment of EA» 
ıa the new regional population centre (Kemp I989) 


Bary dynastic teyre 0 


In contrast to the abundant setlenent remains, graves of the Early Dynastic period are 
comgartively few at Hierakoapolis. This serves as 8 useful caveat, highlighling he 
disparity whieh can exist berween serlement and cemetery evidence. The ‘Fo 
Cemetery’, which seems 1o have served as the burial ground for he majority of the local 
popalatioa during the later Predlynastic period (B Adams 1987), probably continued in 
is role during the First Dynasty Surfsee surveys of the areas adjacent 10 the Fort” 
‘have indicated that the cemetery extendel well beyond the walls (B.Adams 1987:17), 
wand it is 1o fhe north of the structure that he Early Dynastic burials are probably located 
Some Early Dynastic mastabas were in feet excavated in this area at the tum of he 
walnelecath century (Quibell and Circen 1902.25 6, pl LXXIII: R.Fricdman 1994-386) 


Efe 


Alhougl there is no incontrovenible evidence of Early Dynastic occupation at EAfu, a 
umber of oval graves, completely plundered but none the less thought to be carly, were 
Exeavatel is the 1930s (Bruyére 1937; Kemp 1977). Ef eceupies a natural elevation 
within the feodplain, and one might expect such an attractive location to have enticed 
settlers Rom an carly period (Kemp 1977). The earliest pottery Rom the town enclosure 
appears to date to the lale Old Kingdom However, the type of construction seen in the 
iner Of the two concentric enclosure walls - ‘two near-verieal layers of brick. recalls 
he stone architecture of the Third Dynasty step pyrumids (Kemp 197. Hence, it is 
possible that the carly walled town at Eûfu was alfeady established by the beginning of 
he Old Kingdom. Similar layering of brick walls is found at Elephantine and Ekab 
(Kemp, persena! communication), perhaps coalirming a Third Dynasty date for EAT. 


Gebeleln 


Like the modem Arabic name, the ancient name of Gebelein, Jury, reflects the 
topography of he site: hwo hills, rising parallel to the Nile, The smaller, southern hill was 
he iocation foc the temple of Hathor which wras founded befoce the cad of the Second 
Dynasty. The larger, nother hill seems to have becn the site of the main sertlement, with 
the sdjscent desert serving as a burial ground (Donadoni Roveri 1990:23, fig. 3.1). 

There are strong indications that Gebelein was an important site during he 
Predynastic period, and that it femained so ino the Early Dynastic period. Ariel and 
extensive cemetery spanning the whole of the Predlymastie period was situated in the 
dese to the north of ihe setlement The wealth of he cemetery mude ıt the focus of 
graverobbing at the end of the nineteenth century, but subsequent, spocadie excavations 
yielded numerous artefsets. One of the graves coatained a unique palate cloth during 1o 
Naqada II (Galassi 195:542) The presence of such a prestige antefoct suggests that lte 
Predynasic Gebelein vras a Flourishing community wilh advance social stratification. A 
layer of ash on he northem spurs of the northern hill represents the only remains of he 
Predynastic setlement (Donadoni Roveri 1990-23) 

Even though no Early Dynastic setlement remains have been exeavatedl at Cîebeleîn, 
he continued existence of the community is ladicated by the cemeteries in the viciaity: 
An Early Dynastic necropolis covered he ash layer on the northern hil. 1n the earlier 
burials, bodies were wrpped 1n mals of baskets; later gives contained potlely or 


wooden coffins, Several rectangular graves, dated to the First Dynasty, indicate the 
presence Of anolher Early Dynastic cemetery nearby, but it has never Been exeavated 
(Pansdoni Rover 1990.25). 


Amant 


Tere is limited evidence for a settlement at Arman in the late Prodyastic peciod (Mond 
and Myers 1940:1 The earliest material fouad i si ras some Naqada Ill pottery, 
Jalihough It is possible that the town was founded somewhat earlier. A termple foundatioa 
deposit dating 1o the very end of the Predynastic period of carly First Dynasty was 
excavated in the West forecourt of the Isler temple. The only evidence for Early Dynastic 
habilalioa was some fragments of potlery and stone vessels (Mond und Myers 140.2) 
As at Abydos and Hierskonpolis, small villages on the desert edge at Amant seem not 1o 
have survive into the Early Dymastie perlod. Ht is likely that their populations were 
absorbed ini a nev town i late Predynustic times (Kemp 1977:192; cf. Ginter and 
Kozlowskî 1994). 


Nagata 


A similar phenomenon is attested at Naqada, where the small communities in the 
immediate vicinity of the larger town were apparently abandoned during the period of 
state formation (Lamberg-Karlovsky and SablofT 199:132 At he same ime, the 
surviving element (lhe South Town), its population probably swelled by an influx rom 
fhe sumcunding villages, was enclosed by thick mudixiek walls (Kemp 1977-194, 
1940:35 6; Lamberg-Karlovsky and Sabloff 1979132). The South Town remained the 
mala regional foeus of population throughout the late Predynastic period aad into he 
First Dmasly, probably serving an administrative and perhaps symbolic function 
(RFriedman ION4-287, 322) 

Until recently, it was generally accepted that the settlement had been abandoned at the 
‘beginning of the First Dynasty in favour of Nubt, the historic town cated a ile to the 
north. However, an Halian expedition to Naqada in the 1980s found a particularly high 
frequency of ‘Late'-rare polery in the northern part of the South Town. The preliminary 
ıresulls were tested by means of a systematic collection of surface sherds over the entire 
sile, This survey confirmed the hypothesis that the northern and nortle-westem pants of 
he South Town continued to be inhabited into the Early Dyastic period (Barocas e1 al. 
1989.300). Moreover, the intemal development of the setlenment has been traced by 
looking at he disrîbution of ceramic types. I seems that the whole area was eceupied 
during he Naqada Il period, the town gradually shifting ffom the western side of the site 
towanls the edge of the cultivation during the course of the Predynastic period. The 
ıinkbited area shrunk to The north and northwestern parts of the town during he period of 
state formation. These is also somme evidence for Inter dynastic oceupation in the south- 
eastern part of the site, although the main centre of population in 1he region in dynastic 
times was the town of Nubt (Barocas ef at 1989300). 

"Mud seakimpressions provided further evidence for Early Dynastic occupation of he 
South Town and atest continuing activity al Naqada on the part of the royal 
administration afer the unification of Egypt. Two sealings show rows of animals, 


ary dynastic Haye 02 


Churacterisic of he reign of Aha (Dreyer, personal communication), The Malian 
ıexeavaions diseovered some 300 clay sealing: is total, some of then used to close jan, 
others still attached to pieces of string of wooden pegs. Most of the seals have bee 
interpreted as doordoeking devices (R.Friedman 1904-313). The combination of 
substantial mudbriek architecture and doors that were closed with seals suggests he 
existence 0f an administrative centre at Naqada South Town (R Fridman 190437) The 
botanical remains fiom the site support this ierpretation, indicating that substantial 
grain processing took place in the town (RFriednan 194:322). The South Town may 
herefore have served as a centralised food storıge facility as well as an administrative 
centre Tor the surrounding region, The importance of Naqada in the reign of Aha is 
further emplhasised by the presence of twro soyal tombs to the south of the settlement 
(Kemp 1967-24-5, footnote), one of then probebly constnucted r Aha's mother Neth 
hotep. The €lite tombs were apparently accompanied by one or more Early Dynastic 
Cemteries (RL Fricdman 1994:2867), probably scooamodating the burials of the local 
Fist Dynasty officials. Preparations for the burial of Netlrhotep no doubt involved 
agents ofthe central govemment, and the sealings fron the South Tourn certainly suggest 
oficial involvement at Naqada. 


Dendlera 


Alhough the earliest setllement material from Dendera dates t0 the Old Kingdom, the 
presence of a few Early Dynastic burials in the adjacent cemetery suggests that he tow 
may have already been in existence at an garlic period. A group of fifteen Early Dynastic 
burials was excavated at the centre of the main cemetery, due soul of the Temple of 
Hathor. Alhough several of ihe graves were devoid Of any objects, many others 
contained pottery vessels, and nwo burials in paricular yielded material which is 
undoubtedly Early Dynastic (Fischer 1968; Slater 1974). The small number of Early 
Dynastic burals st Denders probably indicates that the town itself was smal at this 
period, However, itis possible that the Early Dynastic cemetery was originally somewhat 
More extensive, sine the excavated Iombs were located in u wai, and other graves ia the 
vicinity may have been washed away. Moreover, ix has been suggested That wo mastabas 
(umbets 5'981 and 8:111) adjacent to an carly Old Kingdon tomb group may in fact be 
Early Dynastic, One of them was found 1o contain a cylinder vessel fsgment with an 
incised decorative band below the rim, characteristic of the Early Dynastie period (Slater 
om. 


Abydos 


The early town at Abydos, situated within the lıter temple enclosure of Osiris, was 
mapped and partially excavited at the beginning of the twentieth cennury (Garstang 1901. 
pl XXXVI Peuie 1902; Kemp I968, 1989-77-0). Remains of walls and setlement 
ebris were found beneath the present ground level on, and adjacent o, the surviving 
town mound (the Kom es-Sulan). In addition, the early tow may have extended further 
o he south-west, Houses of the Early Dynastic period were excavated outside the area of 
he carly temple; some contained sesl-impressions which may be dated by their syle 1o 
he First and Second Dynasties (Reuie 10331, pl. XVLI-, 8I1, H4) A nearby 


cemetery of the early First Dynasty, Cemetery M, undoubtedly served the early tour 
(Petrie 190214-15). The Tact thar he graves lie within the iahvbited area suggests that 
ihe setlement may not have been walled at the beginning of the First Dynasty. A tow 
wall was constructed st some subsequent period, perhaps during the Second Dyaust 
ıalthough an accurate darting is dificult (Kemp 1977:1890). 

Wilh the exception of the Gite Cemetery U, the Predynastic cemeteries at Abydos are 
rather limited in extent, and this suggests that a sılbstantial town seas not founded until 
he very end of the Predynastie period (Kemp 1915:30). The earliest oecupation level 
can be dated to he period of stale formation (Noqada Ila?) (Peie 190222; Kemp 
T9F7:189; Wilkiasoa 19934.218 19), comtemporary ith the royal burial in tomb Uj 

The early settlement at Abydos has been the focus of receat archeological activity. A 
preliminary survey of the town in 1976 (Kemp 1977) was followed ree years ler by 
test excavations, carmied out by the Pennsylvania-Yale Expedition. These greatly 
increased the available dala, indicıtîng that the Early Dynasic-Old Kingdom seulement 
extended over an area of at least 5.6 hectares, probably more (O'Connor 1900:7), 1n he 
southern part of the sile, excavation revealed the commer of a massive mudbrick enclosure 
of the Eafiy Dynastic period. lt may have surrounded an carly palace oe temple, perhaps 
comparable to the Early Dynastic palace gateway excavated at Hicrakonpolis (Weeks 
1971-2), but in she Old Kingdom i was incocported into a residential complex 
(O'Connor 19908, map £8, figs 6-7, pl. 3 Once again, this seems 1o emphasise the 
close connection between Abydos and the royal court in the Early Dynastic period. 


Memphis 


According to luter Egyptian tradition, the city of Memphis was founded by Menes, 
ieendary uniter and fist king of Egypt, when he divened the course of the Nile (Lloyd 
1988,613), 1F we idemrify Menes as the historical Narmer (or his successor Aha), the 
earliest setlement sat Memphis should dte to the beginning of he Fist Dymisty. 
However, as we shall see in the next chapter, it is possible that the setllement was 
founded rather earlier, towards the end of the Naqada I period. Certainly, the earliest 
graves at Helvan—the necropolis which served Early Dynastic Memphis as its main 
Burial ground predate the beginning of the First Dynasty (Wilkinson 1994: 200-10; 
cf, Saad 1947:1112, pl. LX), suggesting that the city, oo, was founder before he reigae 
of Narmer. Recent sulvey work snd an extensive series of dil cores carried out by the 
Egypt Exploration Society's Survey of Memphis have revealed the position of the Nile 
chunel in Predynasic/Early Dynastic times, and have pin-poinled the most. likely 
location for the early city of Memphis (Giddy and Jefieeys 1991:6; Jeflieys and Tavares 
1994). Dill cores taken in 1996 yielded cultural material fron this Iocation_at the foot 
of the North Saqqars escarpment, immediately io the east of the First Dynasty dite 
cemetery including pottery shen, shel fesgments and a piece of blue iit The material 
is concentrated in û layer between 4.5 and 5.5 metres below the surfice, Preliminary 
examination of the podery sherds suggests an Early Dynastic dote, und it is hoped that 
fuure seasons of excavation will be successful in revealing areas of Early Dyoastie 
Memphis 


Early drastic Haymt 04 


aka 


Excavations around the Menkaur pyramid complex uncovered settlement material, 
îneluding Mints and potlery, dating to he Predymastie and Early Dynastic periods. li 
Seems that a small selement which had stood on the site was removed 10 allow he 
construction of the pyramid complex, and that the debris from this settlement was then 
dumped in the area of desert to the south (Bietak 1979:14, 142, a. 35). 


The easter Delta 


Recent sunveys in the caster Delta have revealed numerous sites with late Predyaastie 
andlor Early Dyaacie material (Kroeper 1980). Although most of the evidence is 
funerary, ihe seftlement pattem can be deduced fiom the distribution of cemeteries. It 
seems 1o have been characterised by small villages occupying sites elevned above he 
Tocdplain, particularly gcclras or urtle-aeks'. The impoctance of foreign rde during 
the period of state formen is shown by the large number of sites in the nortlreasters 
Della, along ihe trade roule to southern Palestine. Interestingly, there is very Ile 
evidence for selement in this area fron the carly Old Kingdom. li may be that when 
foreign irade became a monopoly of the royal court afer the Toundation of the Egyptian 
state, the setllements which had grown up along the major tade route were suddenly 
deprived of their economic sole, With all foreign trade now organised centrally, there 
may have been litle incentive to setle un otherwise marginal area such as the north- 
eastern Delta (Bietak 1979), However, elsewhere in ihe Delta, setllements with Old 
Kingdom material are comparatively widespread, suggesting that the Delta was probably 
quite densely setled fron the very beginning of Egyptian history (Wenke 1989). The 
ongoing excavations [Buto) and Tell er-Ruba (Mendes) have revealed 
significant aelivity at both shes during the Predynastic period I is therefore quite likely 

yat most, if not all, of he major Old Kingdom population centres in the Delta had been 
sinhabited at an earlier peciod 


Dubus 


A single Early Dynastic tomb was discovered at Tell Basta, indicating that there was 4 
‘seltlement in this area ffom early times. The importance of Bubastis in ihe Old Kingdon 
already suggested that he site was a much earlier foundation. The prominence of he 
godless Bastet in inseripûons of the easly Second Dynasty may provide additional 
evidence for this. A further inseriptioa may indicate tha Bubusis was already ah 
important settlement at the end of the Predymastie period: a bone label froen tanmb U. at 
Abydos (Dreyer 19034: pl. 71) is incised wilh Iwo hieroglyphs, the saddlebil stork A1 
(Houlihan 1986.234) and the throne sr. This may represent an carly writing of the place 
name Rs ‘Bubastis' (ef Sethe 1906432; Gauthier 1925:5). 


Tell elbtswid 


Tuo soundings made at Tell el-lswîd (south) sevealed settlement material during fron the 
late Predynastie and Early Dynastic periods. The Early Dynastic material is characterised 
by mudbcick architecture, A silo, qers and stone pounders indicate that the settlement 


was probably a farming community. The site seems 10 have been abandoned at some 
polat ia the Early Dynastic period (van den Brink 1989). This development may have 
been part of a wider change in the settlement pattern of the Delta, perhaps coanceted with 
ihe establishment of royal and temple estates in Lower Egypt towards the end of he 
Third Dynasty. 


Minshat Abu Omar 


Excavations at Minhat Abu Omar, i the north-eastem commer of the Delta, have revealed 
ıa exlensive cemetery spanning Ihe lle Predynastic period and Fist Dynasty (Kroeper 
and Wîldung 1985, 1994, Kıeper 1988). Soundings produced evidence of settlement in 
he area from carly Neolihic times, although the later Predynustie and Early Dynastic 
selement has not been securely located. The impodance of the site in he lte 
Predynastie period appears 1o have been the result of It strstegic geographical location. 
lay near he coast, on the Pelusiae branch of Ihe Nile, and at he Egyptian end of the 
pilncipal overland trae route t0 southern Palestine. H was thus ideally iocated for bot 
maritime and overland trade with the Near East, an aetiviey which flourished during the 
lute Predynastie period Imported Palestinian pottery in some of he burials bers witness 
to the active trade engaged ia by the Predyrastic and Early Dynastic iahabitants of he 
NMinshat area. The reasons for the abandonment of the she are unclear. Perhaps a change 
in the position of the Pelusiae branch semoved the sategie benefits of the se, 
Alematively. 4 rise in sea level may have made the low-lying area uninhabitable 
(Kroeper and Wildung 1985:98). The creation of a royal monopoly in foreign trade may 
also have played a pan, denying the iahabitants of Minshat Abu Omar their peineipal 
fivelihood. 


Mendes 


The wo mounds of Tell e-Ruba and Tell Timi comprise the ancient site of Mendes 
(Brewer andl Wenke 1992193), the earliest setlement seems to have been restricted 1o 
“Tell er-Ruba (Wenke and Brewer 1996267, fig. 2). In Early Dynastic times the site 
almost certainly lay on a major Nile branch, providing ficient communication both with 
he rest of Egypt and with dhe Mediterranean Sea (Bietak 1975-110). J is possible that 
Mendes was a major trading-post in the lte Predynastie and Early Dynastic periods, 
connecting Egypt ith the eastern Mediterranean linoral and southem Palestine vin both 
sea and land ıoutes (Brewer and Wenke 1992.193). Mendes is first atested in an 
inscription dating to the reign of Djer, when ie was kaown under the name pr (Brewer 
and Wenke 1992193 

Excavations in the 1960 revealed Early Dynastic levels in a limited area within the 
temple enclosure. A number of Early Dynastic graves were uncovered, and although 
grave goods were scarce, the pottery from the surrounding stratum was dated t0 the First 
ûr Second Dynasty. Similar carly potecy was also encountered to the north of a nearby 
tomb, An Early Dynastic vessel was found at the level of the ground water, n the earliest 
stratum excavated (Hansen 1967:16). 

During recent fieldwork two trial trenches revealet Early Dynastic remains (Brewer 
and Wenke 1992), including » vaulted briek structure which may be the remains of a 


Early drastic taye 06 


toh, and a mudbriek structure and hearths, possîbly the şermuins of domestic buildings. 
Further excavation uncovered ‘a series 6f compacted clay living floors’ (RL Frieden 
1902.204), The deepest levels, sampled by means of an auger, yielded crude chal 
tempered pottery of simple shapes, perhaps comparable to the Predynastie domestic 
pottery fom Buto (Brewer and Wenke 1992:14). This evidence indicates that Mendes, 
oo was already iahabital 1a the Predynastic pericd. Fron the evidence gained thas far, 
he excavators conelude that Mendes ‘was an extensive community’ in the Early Dynastic 
period. They estimate that at this imme the setlement covered much of the later temple 
area (Brewer and Wenke 1992:196). 


Bu 


The site of Buto (modern Tell el-Farstin) probably owed its impomance in Predynastie 
and Early Dynastie limes to a strategie location Geological surveys of the region have 
shown that the town lay not only on a major Nile branch, but also oa or near the coast 
(Wunderlich 1984) Bulo may have serve as a major port and entrepêt for trade between 
Predymastie Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean basin (Wenke and Brewer 1996-270) 
Exeavatons at Tell Fara in/Buto sinee 1985 have revealed a continuous setlemeni 
sequence from late Naqada 11o the end of the Early Dynastic period (von der Way 1986, 
Toe, 1988, 1989, 1992; Fakings and Kêhier 1996). The earliest levels lack any 
ımudbriek architecture; buildings seen to have been maxing and post structures, of which 
only the postholes have survived (Falings and Kbhler 1996). The period of state 
formation (Naqada 1I1) is marked st Buto by the adoption of a new ceramic repertoire, 
signalling a chunge in technology, production and disuibuion (Köhler 1992). This 
eoincides with he appearance of the first sudbrick buildings. The special nature of he 
Early Dynastic complex (see Chapter 8) may also be seflecta in some of the unusual 
forms of potery found within its walls. These include small, rough pots and bag-shaped 
jars pierced afer firing wih one or wo holes (Kbhler 1992:19, fig. 7). The ociglal 
function of both iypes is far from clear, The importance of Buto in the Early Dynastic 
period is also apparent fromm conternporaty inseriptions. First Dynasty year labels suggest 
hat more than one Early Dynastic King visited Buto. The town ter came to symbolise 
Lower Egypt as a whale, just as Hierakonpelis came to represent Upper Egypt (Wilson 
1955). The involvement of officials from the central administration is anested by clay 
seakimpressions found within the Early Dynastic building (Kaplony 1992). These give 
he names of various administrative departments, and the tiles of officials, including 1y 
exkhnum, also named oa inscribed sone vessels ftom beneath the Sep Pyramid at 
Saqqan. 


CHAPTER TEN 
THE REGIONS OF EGYPT 


As we have sec, the scale and pace of urban development in Early Dynastic Eaypt 
depended 1o a hege extent on local factors, economic, political, ecological and 
topographic. To appreciate fhe full complexity of local variation, it is important 1o 
cdnsider the evidence fron a regional perspective. The geographic location of setlement 
ısiles, their hinterlands and economic resources, and their relationships with neighbouring 
‘Sertlements all provide valuable evidence for the nature of provincial ile in aactent Egypt 
ef. Bietak 1979:133), The dominance not only of particular sites but also of certain 
regions during the period of ste focmation and the following Early Dynastic period cat 
be understood by looking atthe distribution of natural resources along the Nile valley. 

"Nature may oflen set Ihe stage for history’ (Seidlmayer 1996: 108), and the regions 
wilh an advantageous resource base—ideally a combination of agriculnural potential, 
access 1o minerals, and a sirtegie posiûon allowing control of trade or transport routes 
emerged as the main centres of power in the lte Predynastic period, The foundation of 
he Egypclan stale brought overtly political factors into play, occasioaally overriding local 
conditions _as in he case of Elephantine—to promote the development of a particular 
locatian as an outpost of central goverment control. The foundation of The new national 
capital at Memphis propelled he surrounding regioa to prominence far beyond that 
which it had enjoyed before the First Dynasty. As the Early Drastic period progressed 
and the court established ever more effective mechanisms for controlling the national 
economy, some of the older centres of influence lost out 1o newer state foundations. The 
history of the regions of Egypt during the late fourth and early thi millenniuns BC 
therefore reflects the complex interplay of a host of factors, Iocal regional and national 
As Egypt headed sowards the centralised state characteristic of the Old Kingdom, he 
‘success of failure of a particular region in attaining or maintaining prominence depended 
to an ever greater degree oa the priorities of the court, la the Early Dynastic period, as in 
iter phases of Egypllan history, regional developmen is thus an tnstrucûve baromeler of 
cemal authority 


THE FIRST CATARACT REGION 


Southernmost Upper Egypt was alvays a border zone, separating the Egyptian and 
Nubian spheres of political and eulural influence. 14 the late Predynasie period, 
senlements of the Nubian A-Group are tested us far north as Kubania, some 1S 
Kilomeues north of Aswan. Moreover, pottery of Nubian origin, or made by poters 
working in the Nubian tradition, seems 1o have been relatively common in late 


Bary drastic Haye 


Predynastie Egyptian contexts in southemmost Upper Eaypt, suggesting close cultural 
links between the Fist Carnet segion and Nubta (Nesdier 1984224). The earliest 
pottery assemblage fro the setlemeat on Elephantine is predominantly Egyptian, but 
oes include some A-CGrmup Nubian muterial (Seidinayer 1996: 111). Trade between 
Egypt and Nubia is well attested in he lute Predynastic and Early Dyeustie periods 
(Takaiya 19949, and there is also evidence_in he cattle burials at Hierakonpolis 
(Hofîman 1982; B-Adams 1996) and Qustul, and the shared iconography of eacly 
kingship at both sites (Wiliams 1986, 1987) for deeper eulaural exchange between the 
late Predynastic polities of Upper Egypt and Lower Nubia 


Regional seılement and the resource hase 


Although occupying an important strategie position at Egypt's southern boundary, and 
ıable to control The ucrtive trade with Nubia and sub-Saharan Attica, the First Cataract 
egion laeked the agricul base associate with other imponant Upper Egyptian 
centres, The strip of culivable land is extremely narrow ia this part of the Nile valley, 
and carly setlers tock advantage of slight broadening of the valley in desert 
enhayments and wadî mouths. The distribution of late Preûynastie cemetertes indicates 
hat the region wras characterised by a series of small villages, strung out along the Five's 
edge st imervals of about 6 kilometres (Seidlrmayer 19968: 113, plus references, 114, f. 
2). This pete of serlement seems to have been seriously disrupted by fhe activities of 
ihe stute oa Elephantine at the very beginning of the Early Dynastic perio, especialy the 
construction of a fortress to guard Egypt's southern frontier (Seidlmayer 196:113) 
Hence, it was Elephantine hut dominated the region both economically and poliically 
fiom the carly First Dynasty. It is probably no coincidence that Elephanrine lies close to 
he largest area of cultvable land ia the region. This lay on the east bank, in the area now 
occupied by the modem city of Aswan. The islands of the First Cataract could have 
suppaned limited culivation, but other sources of food seem 1o have been more 
important in the local subsistence ceonomy, Hunting in the adjacent desert areas would 
have provided game, whilst animal bones ftom the setlement on Elepkantine indicate 
hat fish formel a significant element in the local diet (von den Drieselh 1986: Kazmann 
190) 

The riches of the First Cataract region “did not lie ia bread but in stone’ (Seidlmayer 
19968:11). The granite outcrops which form sueh a prominent feature of the local 
topography were exploited in cary times; the earliest monumental use of pink granite is 
he ning of Den's burial chamber at Abydos. Various other crystalline rocks are 
available in the vicinity, and these were valued or stone vessel manufacture, an 
important craft scûivity in lute Predynastie times. Stone vessels played a key part in he 
conspicuous coasumption favoured Dy growing ites, and as the source of the necessary 
rau tuterials the First Cataract region must have been important. The combination of 
this factor and Elephantine's strategic cation for trade anê defence guaranteed central 
interest and interference in the region ions the very beginning of the Egyptian state. 


Te rgionsel Egypt 299 


Elephanuine and the early state 


"Am easily defended location, together with the factors outlined above, made Elephantine a 
natural foeus for early settlement. Probably from Predynastic times, the island served as 
an enirepût for prestige goods coming from sub-Saharan Afica via Nubia (Seidlmayer 
906:111). Because Egyptian access 1o these irade routes was reinforced by sporadic 
punitive campaigns against indigenous groups (Nesdier 1967, Mumane, 1987), 
Elephantîne sequined a strategic importance as well (Seidinayer 19960.111), The si 
‘gained its character as a town through he functions 1t took over on the national level 
(Seidlmayer 1996b:127). The eoastruetioa of a fortress on the island at he begianing of 
ihe First Dynasty must have had a profound effect oa the local community. The 
foundation, in the Thied Dynasty, of an administrative complex tied to the soyal estate 
probably had a significant impact on the loeal economy. However, despite heavy handel 
sate interference, ‘îhe local community retained fhe informal layout of the village and 
remained devoted to its temple ae its ideological and organisational nucleus” (Seidlmayer 
oo6b:120. 


"THE HIERAKONPOLIS REGION 


The growth of the Hierakoapolis region during the Predlynastic period has been he focus 
of much esearch and is fairly well understood. By contrast, the subsequent history of this 
part of Egypt during the Early Dynastic period is sll ther obscure, although signifîcant 
Sonibutons have been made in recent years (nobly Hollman r al. 1986). By 
conbining the information derived from excavations at Elkab and Hierkoapolis, we can 
begin to sketeh a picture of development f9r this part of southerm Upper Egypt during the 
Sirs three dynasties (Figure 10.1 ), Although he fes of he two sites were intertwined, 
ihe inpoctanee of each derives fron a particular set of ecological and economic factors 
Lying some 15 kilometres to the south of Hierakonpalis, oa the west hank, the town of 
Elf grew up during he Old Kingdom, eventually eclipsing Hicrakonpolis as the main 
regional centre, The history of southern Upper Eaypt during the Early Dynastic period 
And easly Old Kingdom ea be charted in the yaeying fortunes of these three sites. 


Early drastic Haymt 100 


Ene 
as alaye East 
ean o e ena 
au ® 
Kon erahmar! Resin 
N enol Samu E 
1 ao « 
EE E | 


Figure 10.1 Map of the Hierakonpolis region 
‘showing sites mentioned in the text (after 
Needier 1984: map 3). Capitals denote 
ancient place names. 


Tle resource hase 


"To the south of the Hierkonpolis region, at Gebel es-Silsila, the cliffs of the Nubian 
sandstone fommation come close to the river, forming a pronounced coastriction South of 
is point, the more resistant nature of the rock causes the river to flow in a much 
narrower Hoodplain, greatly reducing the strip of culivable land along the hanks of the 
Nile. Hierakonpalis thus represents the southernmost point of agricultural productivity in 
Egypt (Band 1987:90). However, he growth of fhe segion during the Predynastic period 
resulted fom a combination of advantages, strmtegic as well as agricultur. 

"In addition 1o an unusually large area of fertile Moodplain (Fairservis 19712:10), the 
Hierakonpolis region offered other ecological advantages which made it paricularly 
sanractive for carly settlement. la Predynastic mes, the wide expanse of what is now lov 
desert would have been less arid savannah, capable of supporting gume as well as 
providing pastursge lor livestock. The combination of arable an grazing land was 
Clearly advantageous, and ‘the existence of a now defunct Nile channe close 1o the edge 
of he dese may have aumeted setlees to an array of closely spaced ecozones 


Te gions of Eypt 301 


(R Friedman 1904388-9; ef Hoffman e1 al. 1986-178) The presence of abundant fuel 
desert clays and suitable locations for Kilns favoured the development of large-seale 
pottery peoduction (Hoflnan 1984.237), an industry which reached industrial proportions 
J early as the Naqada 1 period. Hierakonpolis seems also to have developed ss an 
important enirepût for prestige gcods imported Rom Nubis and the African hinterland, 
especially elephant ivory, ebony and gold (ef. Bard 1987.90-1). During the period of 
seate formation, Hierakonpolis was a centre of production and distribution for Egyptian 
goods found in Lower Nubian A-Geoup graves, including the pottery known as ‘Lale. 
ware’ oc ‘Hard orange ware’ (Takamiya 1994: B.Adams 1995-21), Finally, the site of 
Hierakonpolis lies opposite the head of a majoc wadî system, the Wadi Abbad, which 
gave access to the mineral resourecs of the eastern desert, including goldbearing meks 
Which were probably exploited in Predynastie times. This factor may have been ı key one 
for he early importance of Hierakonpolis (Trigger, n Trigger e1 al 1983.39; R. Friedman 
1994389). Hierakonpolis thus had the agricultural base to support a substantial 
population, and he encentratioa of resourees to produce a regular surplus. This in tura 
Saubled craft specialisation. Ready access 10 rav materials and favourable sites Of 
pottery manufacture provided further suppot for local industıy; access to markets and a 
Sralegic location aside an important tnıde route encouraged economic seivity. 

‘In sharp contrast to the situation on the rest bank, the strip of culivable land in the 
vicinity of Elkab is exremely narrow. The present course of the Nile is probably not very 
different from that in ancient times. Then, as nov, the town of Elkab seems to have been 
situated on fhe river's edge. As 3 seul, contol OF river trafiic rather than sees 10 4 
large area of fertile Moodplain__was one of the keys to the site's prosperity. Moreover, 
he locarion of Elkab at the mouth of the Wadi Hellal permitted conteol of land utes a 
well (Hendricks 1994:10). Elkab must therefore have been an important communications 
wand transport nele fron Predynastie times The Wadî Hellal also gave secess to the wider 
wadî system of ihe easter desert wilh ts gold-beıring roeks, Gold was certainly 
dispatched via Elkab during historic times (Hendricks 1994:10, quoting Helek 
197:126 whilst soda, also mined in the vicinity (Hendrickx 1994:10, quoting Lucas 
1962.1928), provided 1 further mineral resource. Whatever the benefits of raw materials 
sand a strategie location, a site ean enjoy litle long-term viabiliy without at least some 
agricultural potential. Aihough lacking in alluvial arable land, the population of Ekab 
did have access 1o grazing land, in the Wadî Helal The wadî appears to have supponed 
Iimited pasturuge a lte as the end of the Old Kingdon, indicating that rainfall rmust have 
buen considerably higher in ancient times. A savannasype environment probably 
extended several kilometres along the wadi, providing hunting grounds. Rock drawings, 
some of which are likely 1o be Predynastie, show some of the game which lived in he 
dare and which the local population hunted (Hendriekx 1994:10) Like ts neighbour over 
he river, Elkab benefted from the twin blessings of a resource base (though with the 
emphasis on minerals rather than agricultural land and a steategic location. 


Changing patterns of senlement 


The parted of Predynastic setlement in and around Hierakonpolis is relatively well 
established. Due to its unique combination of advantages, Hierakonpolis self seems to 
have been dhe focus of regional setlement No doubt a buoyant local economy and he 


Barly drastic Haye 02 


presence of a ceremonial centre attructed people from the surrounding region. Although 
here has been no systematic survey of the Hierakonpolis region beyond the nits of he 
American expedition 's concession, visits by members of the expedition to nearby desert 
edge sites, local knowledge and an earlier archscological-geological survey (Kaiser 
1961 all indicate that Hiceakonpolis is he only significant Predynastic setlemeat in the 
area (Hofiman 1984.236). However, de Morgan's survey of the region in 1906-7 and 
1907-8 revealed at least 20 Predlymastic and/or Early Dynastic sites between Esma and 
Gebel es-Silsila (Needier 1984; Bard 1987:81). This suggests thar southern Upper Eaypt 
was quite extensively settled during the Predynastie period (ef. Bard 198781), and 
subsequently experienced a nucleation of setlement at he beginning of the Early 
Dynastic period (in common with other regions of Egypt) 

"Adalina was the largest she excavated by de Morgan, an is now the focus of ongoing 
excavations (Midant-Reynes e1 al 1990, 1902, 1996) The cemetery was used 
continuously from late Naqada I to the beginning o the First Dynasty (Midant-Reynes ef 
dal. 1992141); continued activity into the Early Dynastic period is attested by the thie 
assemblage, ia particular a Fragment of a large, bifaclally ripple flaked, Mint knife 
(Needier 184:83). On the east bunk of the Nile, 12 kilometres north of Elkab, de Morgan 
reported a heavily plundered cemetery at es-Siba iya East which seems to have remained 
in use throughout much of the Early Dynastic period (Needier 1984:146) Indeed, « 
nearby children's cemetery, largely unexplored, can be dated by is associated pottery 1o 
the middle of the Fist Dynasty. Only 5 Kilometres noah of Nekhen, a very large 
cemetery of over 200 graves was exeavated at el-Mamariya (Needier 198490}. It sees 
to have comprised two distinct areas: an earlier one dating to the Predynastie period 
(aqad FI (Needier 198491), and a later one spanning fhe end of the First Dynasly 
and the Second Dynasty. ln the southern part of the Hierakoapolis region, 7 Kilometres 
north of EAfu, de Morgan excavated an Early Dynaste cemetery of about 100 tombs at 
el-Qara, His notebooks also mention a setlement at this site, but no investigations were 
made (Noedier 194:122). 

His difficult 10 draw reliable conclusions fromm the published results of de Mocgan's 
ısurvey and excavatioas, but ifthe sie of Adalma may be taken as typical of the region as 
û whole, Jt would appear that many communities which had flourished during the 
Predynastic period were subsequently abandoned in the aflermath of state fommation: & 
phenomenon which marks fhe rise of urbanism. As Nekhen and Elkab emerged as leading 
Senues of economic activity and population, many smaller village communities in the 
vicinity seem to have suceumbed to the inevitable pressures. A few, such as es-Siba iya 
East and el-Qar must have retained enough local sdvantages to survive. The seulement 
at el-Mamariya may sewually have benefited fom its proximity to Nekhen: the local 
population may have been able to take some par in {he incretsed economic activity 
Which was now concentrated within its neighbouring town. 

"During the late aqara Il and throughout the Naqada I11 periods the Hicrakonpolis 
region wiinessed a progressive shif of setlement away from the Gres Wadi and towards 
ihe Rovdplain (B. Adams 1995) The town of Nekhen continued to grow during the First 
Dynasty; the site as a whole wimessed renewed royal patronage at the end of the Second 
Dynasty: Occupation of the walled 1w and its ewe outliers sees 10 have persisted into 
the early Old Kingdom (B.Adams 1995:64 and Nekhen mmay have coarined during this 
period as ‘an important manufacturing and irading centre for copper and, possibly, gold 


Te gions af Et 


(Hofman eı al. 1986). The settled area at Elkab seems to have semained fairy static 
during The lale Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods (ef. Hendricks and Huyge 1989: 
pl. 1D. Strategie considerations, which lay behind fhe location of he early town, probably 
Prevented any significant shif Of the sertled area. 


THE NAQADA REGION 


Whilst the Hierakonpolis region seem to have been at the forefiont of stale formation, 
another sile has emerged as he leading Upper Egyptian centre in earlier Predynastic 
mes This is Naqala, located oa the west bank of the Nile, opposite the entrance to he 
Wadî Haram. The wradi, ‘one of he relatively few direct and well watered accesses 
to he Red Sea eas (R Friedman 1904-286), afforded exsy access to The gold reserves of 
he eastem desert. Moreover, the bend i the Nîle ss i lows through the Naquda regioa 
‘brings the river closer 1o the Red Sea than at any other point in its course’ (Friedemma 
1994.286). Both these geographic factors would have made Naqada (and Coplos, on the 
opposite bank of the Nile) sn ideal centre for the Predynastic gold trade. Afer the early 
First Dynasty the mmjor foeus of population moved northwrands to a new location, the 
tow of Kub. During the couse of fhe Early Dynastic period, this too declined in 
importance, as Naqada was relegated to a position of provincial obscurity. The eclipse of 
Naqada was secompanied by the rise of Dendera, some 25 Kilometres to the north, and 
perhaps of Thebes, a similar distance 1o the south This is probably ao coincidence, and 
ay Be part of a more widespread phenomenon in which the sole of provincial capital 
was transferred from the traditional centre in many cases an important Predyistie 
seltlement 1o a new town (Kemp 1989) 


Captos, Hu and the rise of Dendera 


Just why Naqada—eather than Coptos, located directly at the mouth of the Wadi 
Hammamat_came to dominate the surrounding region in the Predynastic period is not 
lear. J is a curious fact that all he most important centres of late Predyeustic and Early 
Dynastic Upper Egypt were located on ihe west bank of the river (with the possible 
exeeptioa of Elephantine, an island in the Nile). Whether this is pure coincidence, of 
whether the west bank had a natural advantage, is ditical to say. In Upper Egypt Ioday, 
he expanse of foodplain is wider oa the west bank tun on the east bank, but This may) 
ınot have been the case in the fourth millennium BC. The Coptos eolossî indienne that this 
Sile was an important cult centre from late Predynastic times, und the symbols carved on 
these statues suggest that Coptos was a centre of long-distance trade in anefacts from the 
Red Sen coast; but it never sens 1o have become a major regional focus of population. 
At the beginning of ihe Old Kingdom, both Coptos and the neighbouring site of 
HulAbadiya (cf Willams 186:176) were displaced as important provincial centres by 
Denders: he titles bome by the early Fourlh Dynasty administers of Dendera refe 1o « 
grouping of three adjacent districts, Coptos, Dendera and Hu (Fischer 196%). The 
cenralisation of power which seems to have occurred at the beginning of the Old 
Kingdom and which is most spectacularly atesed by the pyramids of fhe Fourth 
Dynasty was achieved partly by means of a fundamental reorganisation of economic 


Bary drastic Heyret 101 


and adminisıraiye structures. The evidence fron sites such as Dendera suggests that 
another plank of this programe was a conscious policy to intege the peovinces of 
Upper Egypt by removing the seins of power fromm the hands of the traditional ruling 
families (uihich may have retained signilicant influence over theis communities during 
the Early Dynastic period). Centres such as Hierakoapalis, Naqada, Coptos and Hu had 
risen to great prominence during the Predynastic period. Following the foemation of he 
Egyptian site, segional capitals would have served as key nodes in the ational 
ıadmiaistrive apparatus. The transfer of this sole from traditional centres to new towns 
would have been an efTeetive means of bypassing preexisting regional power structures 
and exerting central control. 


Smaller communities 


A reexamination of the evidence has show that, far fromm being isolated centres within 
an otherwise sparsely populated region, Naqals and Coptos were surounded by an 
extensive network of smaller communities, all of which seen to have benefited om the 
region's economic and political advantages (RL Fiedimn 1994-345, fig. &.1; contra Puteh 
191:353). Alhough settlement semaias have only been identified at a few sites — 
Coptos, Naqada Nonh Town and South Town, and Kharara—a larger number of 
cemeteries have been excavated in the Naqada segion, pointing to a relatively dense 
serlement pattem. On the east bank of the Nile, he most significant site published to date 
iis the Predyastic burial ground st Khoza, 25 kilometres south of Coptos (Hendricks 
1992). Here, a secies of cemeteries seems 1o have been strung out along the desert edge, 
comprising many hundreds of burials ranging in date from the Badarian or Naqada Î 
period to the threshold of the First Dynasty. The generul picture at Khozum seems to 
parallel shat in other regions of Upper Egypl: a series of small cemeteries spanned the 
esice duration of the Predynastic period, oaly 10 be abandoned at the beginning of the 
Early DynasGe period when the regional population moved to fewer, densely packed 
ıseltlements, in this case Naqada and Copia 


THE ABYDOS REGION 


The Abydos region (Figure 102) was at the heart of the state formation peocess, anl the 
demographic changes which took place here during the first three dytsties reflect he 
wider poliical developments affeeing the nation as a whole. A detailed archaeological 
survey of the Abydos region (Patch 1991) has indicated that the local soutlxeast quadrant 
ofthe region was alvays lightly seftled; by contrast, settlements were more numerous in 
he nortlenst qundeant and along the entire west bank of the egion (O'Connor 1990:6 
By the Old Kingdon at the latest, setlement clustered around ewro major centres, Abydos 
itself and This the regional capital 


Temin af Et NS 


apan 


Figure 10.2 Map ofthe Abydos region showing sites 
"mentioned in the text (after Wilkinson 
1993a: fig. 22). Capitals denote ancient 
place names. 


The resounce hase 


Abydos today is the richest agricultural zone in Upper Egypt, and presumably 
agriculture vwas the basis ofits wealth in Pretlynastic times" (Bard 1987:90), Moreover, it 
has been suggested that herding and the exploitation of large stands of tinier may have 
buen important elements in he regional economy (O'Comnor 1990:6). However, he 
capacity t0 produce 8 food surplus is, oa it own, not enough to explaia the sise to 
prominence of ihe Abydos region during the Predynastic period. A similar advantage 


Early dynastic Haye 106 


must have been shared by other stretches of the Nile valley which did not develop a 
cemal place on he seale of Abydos/This (Bard 1987190-1). The Abydos region seems to 
have benefited ftom a strategic location foe trade, Abydos itself ies closer to the oases of 
he weste desert than any other sile io the Nile valley. J is possible that the Abydos 
region acted as an entrepût for prestige materials (sue as elephant ivory, hard stones or 
yessels and beads, and ochre) entering the Nile valley Rom the estem desert (Bar 
1o90) 


The tow ond cemeteries of This 


The history and functions of Abydos cannot be understood wîthout reference to Thinis' 
(O'Connor 1990:6, Ironically, he principal setlement in the Abydos region during the 
Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods has not been located by archeologists. The owra 
probably lay close to, if not directly beneath, the modems town of Girga. An inseribed 
‘Satu fragment whieh mentions Thinis is said to have been found at the nearby sie of el- 
Birha, a Hile to the west; this may help o identify the precise whereabouts of the ancient 
ısetlement (Brovaskî 1986415, 481 n. 2) 1F the burials at Naga ed-Deir may be taken as 
û guide the cemelery probably served This as ts main burial ground_the own sens 
o have existod from st least the Naqada 1 period. H assumed a greater significance during 
he lute Prcdynastie period, as he presumed capital of oe of the three Upper Eaypla 
polities, Naqada and Hierakonpolis being the other two. The political and economic 
Power wielded by the lane Predymastic Thine kings must have brought the 1ovm sell 
prosperity and importance on a truly national scale. However, the victorious Thiaite Kings 
SFihe Fiest Dynasty chose to Found a new national capital at the junction of Upper and 
Lower Egypt: Memphis. The town of This probably drew some benefit ftom its close 
contacts WI the court but twas t0 be denied s role as the preeminent city of the newly 
ıunilîed state. Instead, ii was selegated 1o the position of a regional capital 

To judge from the cemelerics at Naga ed-Deir, the population of This seems to have 
semained relatively stable throughout the Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods. None 
he less, Ihe chunges in seltlement and cemetery pattems whic affected the segion as » 
whole_like many other parts of Eypt_during the period of state formation may not 
have bypassed the regiondl capital entirely. Hence, towards the end of Naqada Il, and for 
reasons which remain unclear, Naga ed-Deir wras apparently abandoned in Rvour of an 
ıaltemative burial sie. Graves Rom the late Predyravtie period (late Naqala 11) and fromm 
he period of state formation (Naqada HI Dynasty O’) ace notable by heir scarcity (ef 
Brovarskî 182:300) lt seems fairly certain that a substantial population remained ia the 
area (despite arguments to the contrary [Patch 1991:3091), since Naga ef-Deir saw 
fenewed use as a major cermetey in the Early Dynastic period and Old Kingdom. 

With the advent of the Thin Dynasty, the Abydos segion lost the special role it had 
enjoyed as ihe ancestral home and burial place of the First and Second Dynasly kings. 
However, the local rulers__possibly the lineal descendants of the First Dynasty Kings 
evidently coatinusd 1o exereise considerable authority at a regional level The economic 
power of the Thinite governors, derived ftom their control of one of the most fele and 
prosperous stretches of the Nile valley, was expressed in their funerary monuments: & 
series of huge mudbriek mastaba tombs ras erected on the low desert at Beit Khallaf, 1o 
ihe west of This and directly opposite Naga ef-Deir. The scale of Belt Khalaf mastabas 


Te gions af Et 7 


KI and K2, data by sealkimpressions to the reigns of Neerikhet and Sanakht, is quite 
unparalleled at any other contemporary provincial site. Smaller mustabas, probably 
belanging to lesser officials of the regional administration, are located at ‘he nearby 
cemetery of Reqaqna. The evidence from the Thiakte area for the continuing strength of 
local identity after the foundation of the Egyptian state provides an important balance 1o 
he outward appearance of centralised contol promoted by the royal court. The 
distribution of cemeteries in the Thinite ares during the Early Dynastic period minors the 
picture in fhe Mempite region: the local Gite were buried in tonsbs on the western desert 
Sûge, while the lesser officials and the majocity of the local population were iaterred in 4 
separate cemetery on he east bank of the Nile. 


"Selament nucleation and the carly town a Abydos 


The temporary abandonment of the cemetery ut Naga ed-Deis reflects the demographic 
changes hich affected many parts of the country during the period of state formation. 
Moce strîking evidence comes thon the vicinity of Abydos itself, Many of the cemeleries 
close to Abydos — including es-Salmani (el-Sayed 1979) and Havashinn on he west 
bank, and Naga elMashayikh oa the east banke were abandoned st the end of he 
Predynastie period, indiesting shat a nucleation of settlement took place (Kemp 
977.189). This phenomenon scems t0 have had an impact even upon the peeviously 
sable communities of Mahasna and el-Anra. Both apparently suffered an imeversible 
decline in their forgunes at he beginning of the Early Dynastic period (Wilkinson 
1903a:220-1). The foundation of he tow a1 Abydos can be dated to Naqada 11l (e 3150 
BC) and was probably closely bound up vith the pescess of state formation. The town is 
likely to have aracted the populations of scattered villages, lured by the economic and 
ıphysieal security which a Iowa provided, as well as by potentially greater employment 
oppormunities. The continued prosperity of the Abydos region in the Early Dynastic 
peliod is demonstrated at Abydos self Ihe town expanded throughout the rst six 
hmasties, and the temple sens 1o have undergone several rebuilding phases (ef. Kemp 
GEIS). 


THE BADARI REGION 


1n Middle Egypt, he wîde alluvial plain on the east bank of the Nile is demarcated by the 
line of steep limestone cliffs which approach closest to the river near Matmar in the north 
wand el-Etmania in the soul (O'Connor 197291). Between these two points the clifTe 
secede, forming a large embayment The fertile floodplain is coasiderably wider in this 
part of Nile valley than further south, giving the Badari region high agricultural yield 
(Wîlson 1955.217) and enabling it to suppor a relatively large population. However, the 
egin possessed no other particular alvantages, Certainly, it was not strategically located 
for either intemal or extemal trade. This funetion was dominated by Asyut, 10 the north 
which was situated sat a constriction of the Nile valley, ideal for controlling serine 
ıeaffc (O'Connor 1972912). The lek of access to trade routes may have been a major 
reason why ihe processes of social strstifcation and state formation did not ProBfeSS aS 
r or as fast in the Badlacî region as in some of the communities further south (Band 


Early drastic Haye 08 


1987:90-1). The nucleation of setlement seen in other regions of Egypt during the period 
of state formation is not apparent in the Badarî region. Only in the Old Kingdon did a 
regional capital of any size develop at el-Emanis (O'Connor 1972), perhaps evanected 
Wh the establishment of royal estates in he aces (Jacquet Gordon 1962:1301), 

‘The size and distribution of cemeteries in the Badarî region (Holmes and Friedman 
1989) suggest both a shifî in the centre of population and a change is he seulement 
pattem at the end of the Pretlynastic period. Whilst the principal Preclynustie senlemens 
Sere located in the norhem purt of the region, in particular Matar, Montages and 
Hemamia (Brunton 1937, 1948), the Early Dynastic population seems to have been 
concentrated in he souihem area bewsen Hernia and el-Eumunis (O'Connor 
1972:91). The abandonment of the settlement at Hemamia towranls the end of he Naqada 
Il period (Brunton and Caton-Thompson 1928-78) probably reflects a more general 
ısetlement shi froot the desert edge 10 the Roodplain, pethaps connected with intensified 
basin irigation (Kemp 1977-197. The burial rate for the Badari region in the Early 
Dynastic period, as reflected in the number of excavated graves, is extremely low, 
especially hy comparison with the precaling Predynastie period (O'Connor 197286) Ii 
has becn suggested that this reflects a low population (O'Connor 1972292-3), but other 
actors may be responsible. is quite possible: fbr instance, that the number of recorded 
Early Dynastic burials in the Badarî segioa does not accurately reflect the original 
mortuary population. Furthermore, evidence from the Memphike region indicates hat the 
widespread encroachment of desert dunes 1owands the end of the Old Kingdom affected 
ıseltlement on the west bank of he Nile (Jefireys and Tavares 1994), if this phenomenon 
as repented in Middle Egypt, tis likely that Predymastie and Early Dynastic senlemens 
on the west bankand perhaps their accompanying cemeteries - were abandoned in he 
fice ofthe advancing dunes, and now lie buried several meles belor the peesent ground 
surface. This could account for the apparent absence of carly remains on the west bunk 
fiom the entrance to the Fayum southwards to the Abydos region. 

At Matar, here is a continous burial record fom a period of some two 
millennium, fiom Naqada 1 1o the Old Kingdon (Brunton 194829-40). The process of 
‘Skate formation appears 1e have had linle effect upon the community st Matmar. In all 
probability a small furming village without the network of trading contacts enjoyed by 
her centres, Matar illustrates the rermarkable stability of the rural Egy pian population 
over long periods of time. Whilst major ceatwes of political and economic importance 
ere clearly affectal by changing circumstances, smaller setlements inhubited largely by 
subsistence farmers were less prone to national forces. The cemeteries at Mostagedda 
probably served a village which was inhabited continuously throughout the Predyastie 
Period (Bruton 1937). The burial record does not evtend into the Early Dynastic period. 
bul ris possible that some ancient cemetecies have been destroyed by modeen building O 
gavedigging, ln Ihe Early Dynastic period the Badarî region was characterised by a 
series of small setllements, reflecting is remoteness fron the centuvs of economic and 
political power. The Second snd Third Dynasty stairway tombs near Radarî suggest that a 
focal ele was able to bereft fiom the region's agricultural weal and genel 
prosperity. However, the region as a whole remained insignificant in national terns. 


Te mgionsel Ep 9 


THE MEMPHITE REGION 


The apex of the Nile Delta emerges as a crucial region from the very beginning of 
Eyptan history (Figure 10.3), I was here that the early kings of a united Egypt chose 1o 
esplish heir capital city, the centre of the administrative apparatus created 10 supervise 
and control the sew nation stute. However, Memphis was certaialy not founded in a 
Yingin location, noc was the choice of location arbltrary. Three Ioealiies displaying he 
ceramic assemblage characteristic of the Predynastic northem tradition have been 
excavated aloag a short srwlch ofthe Nile's cast banl. perhaps indicating that there was & 
ısignifeant density of settlement in he Mernphite region iw the carly Predynastic peniod 

The sudden demise of Misadi in the latter part of Naqada I raises important questions: 
ıhe most plausible explanation would appear 1o ie in the changes in climate, ecology and 
subsistence patterns which seem t0 have occurred throughout Egypt at this time. The 
desiccation of the desert savannahs following the end of the Neolithic subpluvial was 
accompanied by a change to agriculture as the principal subsistence base. The decline in 
he importance Of herding and the deterioration of the previously advantageous desert- 
edge ecosystem seem to have led 1o the widespread relccation of setlements to the 
Soodplain. The alluviu now offered the most attractive environment for human activity, 
whieh was base almost entirely on agrieulaure. Madî, shuated oa the low desert with 
easy access 1o the nov arid pastursges, was no longer an attractive locatioa for a local 
population of farmers, i îs Hkely that this population moved to a new senlement in the 
Teodplain, and the site ler occupied by the city of Memphis would be an obvious 
candidate, 

"At the beginning of the Early Dynastic period incipient urbanisn - and in particular 
the establishment of Memphis ss the national capital _ seems to have had a major impact 
on the smaller, surrounding setlements. The growth of Memphis as the dominant 
popalstioa centre of ihe region, snd changes in local topography caused by he 
Gastward movement of the Nile channel and the rising height of the river's oodplain - 
emerge as fhe major factors affecting setlement and cemetery disuîbution la the 
Memphis region during the Early Dynastic period. 


ary dynastic Haymt 10 


Figure 10.3 Map of the Memphile region showing 
‘sites mentioned in the text (after Jefireys 
and Tavares 1994:16, fig. 1). 


The early city of Memphls 
Ht would not be surprising if future excavations revealed that the city of Memphis had 
indeed come into existence during the late Naqada Il period. Isolated stone paletes found 
iin the vicinity of Abusir (Kaiser 1964:1067) strongly suggest 3 lte Predlynastic presence 
sand, ss we have seen in Chapter 9, he earliest graves st Helwan predate the beginning Of 
he First Dynasty, the radiional date for he foundation of Memphis 


Tis aE S1 


A strıtegie location 


The choice of Mennphis by Egypt's first kings as their new national capital reflects the 
sile's stmtegie importance, First, and most obvious, he apex of the Dela was a 
poliically opportune location for the state's administtive cene, standing ut he 
balance of dhe Tuo Lands (a later appellation for Memphis) and offering ready access 
to bol parts of he county. The older, Predymastie centres of power, Tis and 
Hierakonpalis, were too remote from the vast expanse of the Delta which had been 
incorporated into the unilîed state. Only a city within easy reac of both the Nile valley 1o 
he soul and ihe more spread oul, dificult tersi to the north could provide the 
necessary political control that he rulers of Early Dynastic Egypt required. 

‘Second, he region of Memphis must have served ıs an important node for transport 
sand communications, even before the uaicstion of Egypt. The region probably sled as 
ıa conduit for mueh, if not all of the riverine trade between northern and southem EYD 
Moceover commodities (such as wine, precious oils and metals) imported from the Near 
East by the royal courts of Prediyrastic Upper Egypt would have been channelled through 
ihe Memphite regio on their vray south ls short, terefoce, the sie Of Memphis offered 
he rulers of the Early Dynastic period an ideal location for controlling internal trade 
“wihin their realm, an essential requirement foc 8 stateddirected, sedisuîbutive economy: 
Equally important for the naonal administaion was the ability t0 contol 
communications within Egypt. The Nile peovided the easiest and quickest anteny of 
communication, and the national capital was, again, ideally located in this respeet, Recent 
geological surveys of the Memphite region have «ovealed much about is topography in 
ancient times. It appears that the location of Memphis may have been even more 
advantageous for controlling trade, transport and communications than was previously 
ypreciated. Surveys and drill cores have shown that the level of the Nile floodplain has 
steadily fae over the last fve millenniums (Jeffreys and Tavares 1994:1578) When 
he oodplain was much lower, as it would have been in Predynastic and Early Dyoastie 
times, the outwash fans of the Wadi Hof and Wadî Digla would have been much more 
prominent features oa the east bunk. The fan associated with the Wadi Hof extended a 
Significant way into the Nile floodplain, forming a constriction in the vicinity of 
Memphis. The valley may have narrowed at this point to a mere 3 Kilometres (leltieys 
sand Tavares 1904:15), making i the ideal place for controlling river traffic. 

Third, the Memphite region seems 1o have bezn favourıbly located foe the contol not 
only of riverine trade, but also of deser trade routes (cf. Jefireys and Tavares 194:158) 
The tro outwrash fans aleady mentioned gave secess 1o extensive wadî systems of the 
casters desert, Ia Prellyastic times, the Wadi Digla may have served as 3 trade route 
between the Memphite region and the Neu East 1o judge from the unusual concentration 
of foreign artefacts found in the Predynastic setilement of Mandi. Access to, and control 
of, trade roules betwwcen Egypt and the Near East seems to have been a preoccupatioa of 
Eypts rulers during the period of state formation. The desire to moaopolise foreign 
trade may have been one of the prinmary factors behind the political unification of Egy 
The foundation of the national capital at the junction of an impoqant trade route wilh the 
Nile valley is not likely to have been accidental Moreover, the Wadis Hof and Digla 
provided ihe Memphite region with aceessible desert pasturage. As we have already see 
ıi the eases of Hierakonpolis and Eikab, the conmbination of desert pusturage and alluvial 
arable land in fhe samme area was a particularly attractive one fof easly setlement; this 


Barly drastic taye 12 


combination no doubt contributed to the prosperity of he Memphite region fromm carly 
Predynustie times. 


The setilement and cemeteries of Memphis in the Early Dynastic period 


Te extensive Early Dynastic cemeteries of North Saqqara/Abusir (on the west bank) and 
Helwanel-Maasara (on the eıst bank) are eloquent testimony to the size of early 
Memphis and 1o the wealth of is highest officials. The dite mastabas strung out along the 
edge of the escarpment at North Saqqara are impressive funerary constructions (Enwery 
1949, 1954, 1958). A cemetery of poorer graves was excavated by Bonnet (192%) a iie 
to the north, near he moder village of Abusis, and more recent investigations by the 
FEaypian Antiquities Organisation have uncovered furiher Early Dynastic graves in this 
area (Leclant and Clere 1902242, 1903-200, 1994376), It is now clear taut both 
Cemetery areas in fet cormprise a single, large burial ground which served the early city 
of Memphis. Over oa the east bank of the river, and directly opposite the dlite cemetery 
of Korth Saqqara, the huge necropolis of Helwan (more precisely, el-Maasara) represents 
he largest Early Dynastic burial ground anywhere in Egypt (Saad 1947, 1951; Wilkinson 
1996a). Helwan clearly served as the capital's second cemetery during the first three 
dynasties, The sheer number of burials indicates a considerable Early Dyastie 
ıpopulatioa, including large administrative cass 

Dill ecees taken by the Egypt Exploration Society's Survey of Memphis have 
revealed deposits of Early Dynasie material concentred in a band running along he 
base ofthe Noh Saqqara escarpment (Giddy and Jeflreys 1991) Here, t seems, was the 
core of the early city, and such a lecation fits well with the distribution of cemeteries in 
he vicinity: he Early Dynastic city would have stood directly betwcen its two principal 
cemeteries, North Saqqars and Heran. The inhabited area also seems 1o have spread 
norvards, occupying an area close t0 he modem village of Abusir. This probably 
elles he location of the Nile channel in ancient times, which evidenily flowed quite 
close 1o the ellge of he Saqqara escarpment, providing only a thin strip of land oa its 
western bank for cultivation and setlement (Jefeys and Tavares 1994:155-7). Hence, 
he early city of Memphis would have extended as a ribbon development along the river's 
edge, and evidently n a northerly direction, Towards the end of ihe Third Dynasty, the 
eastward progression of the river channel and the steady rise in the height of he 
floodplain seen to have caused the centre of population to shift southwards. The Abusir 
Wadî continued to serve ss a burial grvund, but the main sceese roule to the necropolis 
seems t0 have been further south, aad entered fron the ples fron the east (Jefîreys and 
Tavares 194:150). The elite cemetery of Non Saqqara, so closely linked to the early 
ıcily, was abandoned, and high-status burials were constructed furlner soulh, closer 10 he 
Step Pyramid enclosure of Nejerikhet. 


The foundation andl grout of Memphis: regional effects 


The foundation of Memphis, and its growth to become the largest concentration of 
population and employment in the region, might be expeeted 10 have hal profound 
fleets upon the demography of the sunounding area. However, the degree 1o which 
hese developments affected ladividual conumuunities seems t0 have depend very much 


Ti gis aE S13 


upon local fietors. Thus, somme communities were dealt a fatal blow by the rise of 
NMermphis; others, perhaps with greater natural advantages, survived and prospered 

The repercussions were certainly felt as far afield as Tarkhan. Having been an 
important centre during the peciod of state formation (Dynasty 0), Tarkhan 
subsequently declined to a provincial backwater by the end of the Fit Dynasty. It is 
probable that, by he middle of the First Dynasty or so, Memphis had become the largest 
Giny in Egypt Hence, whilst there is no evidence to support Pevie's suggestion that he 
Tarkhan setllement was actualy ‘the ternporary capital of the dynastic people, before he 
founding of Memphis’ (Petrie 1914:1), his linkage of the growth of Memphis with the 
decline OF Tarkhan is probably a valid one The rise of Memphis and the huge expansion 
of the cemetery at Helvan seen to have had litle effect, however, on the community at 
Turn. This was peobably a dieeet sucesso of the Predlynastie settlement s1 Madi, since 
he two sites are only 1 kilometre apart. The area's ecological and strategic advantages 
(discussed above) were clearly sarsctive to setlement Such local factors seem to have 
enabled the coramunity to survive and prosper even aller the growth of Memphis: the 
burial record at Tura continues unbroken throughout “Dynasty O and the Early Dynastic 
period, with some of the wealthiest graves dating to the First Dyausty. Also largel 
affected was the cormmunity at Abu Rawash, af the norherm end of the Memnphite 
necropolis. The sequence of Early Dynastic cemeteries continues unbroken, the nuniber 
Of interment undiminished, throughout ‘Dynasty 0’, he First and Second Dynasties. At 
Zawiyet el-Aryan, nearer Memphis, the picture is very different. The foundation and 
owls of the ne capital appears t0 have dealt the small community a fal blow, the 
number of burials in the cemetery showing a dramatic decline after the beginning of the 
First Dynasty (although he burial rate increases again slightly towards ihe end of the 
First Dynasty: and a similar temporary resurgence of local activity may also be refloctel 
in the First Dynasty dilte mastabas at Tarkhan [Wilkinson 19934-2111) 


THE DELTA 


Recent survey and exeavation have revealed that the Delta was a fourishing area in 
Predynastie and Early Dynustie times (van den Brink 1992e: Wilkinson 1996b.91-6). 
Wherever intensive surveys have been conducted, numerous carly sites have been 
ıdiseovered, ofîen in quite dense concentrations (Werke and Brewer 1996-271), ln terms 
of landscape, resources and factors affecting early selement, the Delta presents a very 
"different picture from the Nile valley south of Memphis (Werke and Brewer 1996271). 
Geography and trade seem 1 have been particularly influential ia the development of 
he Delta Stes raised above the low-lying Moodplain were favoured for early settlement; 
in peice this meant the levees of Nile benches and geziras. The latter seem 10 be 
concentrated in the eastern Delta, giving this region an advantage. The most staking 
feature of the Delta, apart from the flatness of the terrain, is the nework of branching 
waterways which divides the land into natural pockets, This would have acted as 
something of a barrier to east-west communication, although setlenments located on the 
main Nîle branches would have enjoyed easy acess both to the Nile valley upstream and 
to he Mediteranean Sea. The proximity of the Delta to Egypt's Near Easter 
neighbours especially Syria-Palestine_ gave the region a leading role in foreign trade. 


Early dynastic Haymt 14 


As ade in prestige commodities intensified during the period of state formation, sites in 
he Delta which conwolled or channelled such wade were able 1o reap the benelits. The 
very existence of some communities, such as Minshat Abu Omar in the nortlreasters 
Delta, seems 1o have been based on trade wth Palestine (Kroeper and Wildung 198597 
8 A a result of geographical and economic factors, then, the most important early 
ıseltlements in the Delta seem 1o have grow up on major Nile branches, ofien close 1o the 
Mediterranean coast, or at foeal points oa Near Eastern trade routes, This helps to explain 
he prominence of shes like Bula, Sals and Mendes, as well as Minshat Abu Omar. 1n 
general, early sites are concentrated in fhe nortleastemı Delta and along the western Nile 
branches. By contrast, he central Delt seems to have been rather sparsely populated in 
he Early Dynastic period (Wenke and Brewer 1996.272). 

"Afer the unification 0f Egypt, the policies of the state towanls Lower Egypt became 
primary determinants of regional development. Large areas of fenile and productive 
Bericultural lund made the Deka an atrxcive location for he foundation of royal 
domains and estates, which the Early Dynastic kings established to provide fo their 
mortuary cults and to support the royal household (Wilkinson 1996006), The efficient 
exploitation of he Delta's natural resourees also required a netwok. OF strategically 
local collcetion points, where agriculnural produce could be gathered for distribution 10 
he ceneral treasury. This factor probably had a significant ieıpact on the setlement 
pattem of the Delta in he Old Kingdom. The policies of the central government affected 
Dela communities in other ways as well. Fron the beginning of the First Dynasty, 
foreign trade may have become royal monopoly. For a ste like Minshat Abu Omar, the 
‘nationalisation” of trade would have removed iis key advantage and he basis for iis 
prosperity. On another level, the court was keen to promote and defend the territorial 
integrity of the stale, partly through the explicit demarcation of national frontiens. t 
seems ikely that certain Delta ses were chosen to set as strategie border posls by the 
Early Dynastic govemment, perhaps giving some setlements a new raison d étre, Bulo 
and Kom elin may have performed such a role with respect to the western Delta, 
guarding the Egyptian state against infihration by Libyan peoples (Wenke and Brewer 
T96). As part of the intensive program of royal propaganda hunched by Egypt's early 
Kings, impodant Delta sites were vised by the king. He may have hud residences al the 
more important locations, and there are inscriptions which suggest a royal palace at Bulo 
in the Early Dyastic period (hf p-Hr.men, attested on sealkinmpressioas and inscribed 
stone vessels). The presence of 4 royal residence would naturally have boosted he 
importance of a local community, and this is another way ia which the state may have 
alluencel he development of Delta sites. Hence, the history of the Delta during the late 
Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods reflects the interplay of a combination of factors, 
geographical, economic and political. These can be seen at work more closely in the masi 
‘intensively siudied region of he Delta. 


Te norhaastern Deha 


The northeastern Delta has emerged as an area of substantial early activity (Krmeper 
1989), as attested by the concentration of lie objects found at shes in the region (Cl&at 
1914; Leclant 1952244; Fischer 1958, 1963) and confirmed by the excavation of 
numerous settlement and cemetery sites. 


Ti gir sft S15 


In the estem Delta, before the end of the fifth millennium, the landseape seems to 
have been free lions the elles of the inundation, making i more attractive for Neolithic 
seltlement However, Rom at least the beginning of the foun millennium, climatic and 
geological condiions in he westem Delta changed signiticantly, necessitating the 
femoval of setlements to higher ground, This seems 1o have tiled the balance in favour 
of the eastern Delta as the more favourable area for settlement (Andres and Wunderlich 
1992.164). The widespread presence of “nurtle-backs" or gezirus in the eastem Delta 
offered auractive locutions for villages and heir secompanying cemeteries. I is 
noteworthy that all of the easter Delta archaeological sites lavestigated in recent years 
are located on gezbus, ineluding Tell Ibrahim! Awad (van den Beink 1992). Tell el 
Farklha (Chlodickî e at 1992) and Minshat Abu Omar (Krzyzaniak 1992), At a time 
when contacts between Egypt and the Near East were imensifying, the added struction of 
access 1o trade utes helps 10 explain he concentration of lute Predynastic and Early 
Drastic sites in the easter Delt revealed by recent excavations (Bard 1987: but note 
she comments of Chlodaickî et al 192:183), 

"Following the unification of Egypt, some communities in the caster Delta coatinued 
to foucish for as long as the court maintained intensive contacts with sourhem Palestine. 
However, by the beginning of the Second Dynasty, a realigznmeat of trading relations; 
combined with a possible change in the course of the main eastern Nile branch, removed 
the strategic advantages of these communities, A rise in se level may also have 
coniwîbuted, making the low-lying areas uninhabitable (Kroeper and Wildung 1985-08) 
The abandonment of the cemetery at Misshat Abu Omar by he end of the Second 
Dynasty at the latest mirrors the decline of the region as a whole, The administrative 

sructure imposed by the Fit Dynasty kings on she Delta seems 1o have treated it as 
“unclaimed landî, ripe for appropeiation by the coun for he foundation of royal estates 
(Wîkinson 19960.96). In contrast with sites in the central and westem Delta which 
gained their importance throughout the Early Dyrantie period and beyond, he ersvhile 
important Predyaastic centres of the eastern Delta were either abandoned entirely or 
declined 1o become distant provincial backwaters. Not until the lute Middle Kingdon was 
he estem Delta ance agai to occupy 3 central position in Egyptian political and 
economic lite 


EPILOGUE 


Early Dynastic Egypt has come of age. It can no longer be regarded as an obscure 
transition, bridging The gap between the beguiling Predynastic period and the spectacular 
Old Kingdom The Early Dynastic period deserves 1o be eated in is own right as 4 
major stage of ancient Egyptian civilisation: not just any stage, but the formative one. As 
we have seen, most of the Key festures which, foc us, define ancient Egyptian civilisation 
were initially developed by the ling dite of he Early Dynastic period. The mechanisms 
of rule which semaine at the heart of Egyptian govemment for some three thousand 
years had their origin in the fist three dynasties. They were formulated in response 1o the 
enormous challenge of ruling the world's first nation state. Their particular character 
sued not only the geography of Eeypt but also the Egypian psyche. Whether 
Sdmiisuntive structures, foreign relations, the ideology of divine kingship, royal 
mortuary anchiteetare or ihe practice of religion, the solutions adopted by Egypt's carly 
ules 1o the problem of establishing authority moulded heir country and profoundly 
influenced iis subsequent developmen Away fiom the interests and influence of the 
court, however, local communities and the regions had their own concerns. Such faetoes 
were equally important for the character of life inthe Nile valley and for the trajectory of 
Egyptian history. 

Afler more than a century of interest in the earliest period of Egyptian history, we can 
now aempt to answer the question, ‘what came before the pyramids?" The body of 
evidence for Early Dynastic Egypt is considerable (if complex) and growing all the time. 
Very year, new infocmation fom excavations and scholarly studies is enhancing our 
understanding of Egypt's early civilisation. The picture is far fron complete, but it is 
certain that in future Years many more piecs ofthe puzzle will fll into place. 


GLOSSARY 


From the outset, it has been the author's intention to make this book as accessible a6 
possible to non. Egypologists. Specialist and technical vocabulary has therefore been 
Kept 1o a minimum However, in the loterests of accuracy and coaciseness it has proved 
necessary to retain some term hich may be unfamiliar to readers from ouside the field 
OF Eayplology. Such terms fall into two broad categories: specialist words and phrases 
which are confined to the study of ancient Egypt, and tems which are in general usage 
buf which have s specific, sometimes different, meaning to Egy plologists For the sake OF 
clarity, both pes of term have been included in the following glossary. 1 is important 10 
understand that certain words and phrases Will be used in slightly different ways by 
different authors. The glossary below explains the meaning of terms as they are used is 
he curren work. The first lastance of each glossary entry tn the text has been marked in 
bold 


Acgroup (a) The indigenous Neolithic culture of Lower Nubia which flourished in the 
‘Seon half ofthe fourth millennium BC. 

amuletie (adi) Possessing the magical, piotective power of an amulet (a small object 
warm about fhe person to protect its wearer fron mnali forces), 

Amuq (x) 4 plain in coastal northern Syris; also used to describe the cultural sequence 
Of this region during the fourth and early third milienniunms BC. 

ınals (1) Records of the reigns of the Early Dnasric period and early Old Kingdom, 

compiled at a later date and laseribed oa blocks of stone which would originally have 

been set up in a temple context, Several fragments of ancient sanals stones have 

survived, notably the Palermo Sune and the associated Cairo fragment. When 

complete, hey sould have recorded the major events of each king's reign-fionn the 

beginning of ihe First Dynasty to the middle ofthe FIR ~ in a year-By-yeaf format. 

apotropalc fod) Able to ward of evil. 

Archaic (ud) Term used to denote the first wo dynasties as a period of Egyptian 
history; now ofien replaced by Earl) Dınastie 

Aslatle (1 and adj) A» inhabitant of the lands to the norileast of Egypt (present-day 
"Sinai, lerıel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria). Hs peje-rtive tone seeurately reflects the 
usage ofthe parallel ancient Egyptian termî 


bark (r) The sacred or ritual boat ofa king or deity 

breccia (a, Technically ‘red and vihite limestone breccia’: a sock with white inclusions 
in an orange-red matrix, favoured for sions vessels and small sculptures in the Early 
Dımastle period. 


cartouche (.) In ancient Egyptian inscriptions, the elongated oval frame used to enclose 
‘certain royal names from the end of the Third Dynasty 
yû (0 A tamab o¢ other monument built for purely syrabolic purposes 


ceramic (adj) Referring to pottery. 

ceramiclst (4) A specialist who studies (ancient Egyptian) pottery. 

Chaleolltaic (1. ancl ad) Literally ‘copper stone age’; an archaeological period applied 
to the Near East, Ihe transitional stage between dhe end of the Vevllhie and the 
beginning of he Early Bronze Age (EB) when copper and stone tools were both in 
use; te daling varies ftom segion to region, but in the Levant it roughly corresponds to 
£ 4000-3600 BC, equivalent 1o the Badlarian and Naqada 1 periods in Upper EYP 

eo tegeney (1) A constitutional practice whereby a King's secessor (usually his eldest 
surviving soa) would be crowned during his predecessor's (father's) ifetime, and he 
o monarchs would reign jolatly for period. The practice was designed to ensure a 
ısmootl transition Of power fromm one reign to the next. 

corvée labour (n) The administrative and economic system whereby agricultural 
‘workers (ihe bulk of he population in ancient Egypt) gave their labour to the state 
during he annual undurlon in return for the use OF de land which in theory 
belonged to the king _ihe rest of the year: this system allowed the state to mobilise the 
huge resources of manpower needed 10 build royal monuments such as the pyramids. 

cosmological (a4/.) Referring 1o speculation about the composition and workings of he 
‘universe (eosmolozy). 

cursive (aj) Deseribing inscriptions writen in iak with a running hand, he individual 
‘signs mece hastily executed han monumental hieroglyphs 

ıeyllnder seal 0.) A cylindrical piece of stone (or occasionally wood), carved with an 
iînseripioa, often identifying ownership; to seal an item, the cylinder would be rolled 
over a sealing of wer clay, making an impression of the original inseription. 

cylinder vessel (2) A cylindrical jar, up 10 about 30 centimetres in heigl, usually made 
“rom marl clay potiery and fired to a pale creams colour, probably in imitatioa of stone. 
Cylinder vessels of stone, usually ravens, are also known. Pottery cylinder Vessels 
were manufactured in urge numbers during the lte Predrnastic to Early Dnastic 
dansition. The paterm of the incised decorative band around the shoulder changed 
over time, making eylinder vessels a good chronologieal indicator. 


demography (n) The study of population, expecially its disrîbuioa 

diorite (r) A hart, neous sock, dark wilh ghter rmotles, obtained principally from the 
"weste desert, und use for sıone vessels and stutuary. 

deteplllar (1) An ancient flak of unknowa origin, associated wit the god Pah and, 
‘luler, with Osiris, god oF the dead; used as the hieroglyphic sign for ‘stability. he 
symbol may represent a leafless tree or a notched sick; somelimes called the 
“hekbone of Osiris’ 

dolomite fn,) A variety of limestone composed of calcium and magnesium carbonate, 
used for stone vessels. 

domain (1) A royal foundation, comprising an area of agricultural land together with its 
Iivestock and workforce; established to provide inconse for a King's mortuary cult 

double crown (1) ln Egyptian lconogruply. the crown formed by combining the 
separate red cro and white cron 

“Dynasty O 0t) Terms coined 1o describe the late Predynasilc kings who nuled over part 
or all of Egypt before the beginning of the First Dynasty. The use of the word 
“dynasty? is misleading since the rulers before Nacmer probabiy belonged 1o a variety 


of royal houses, some of them perhaps reigning concurteatly in different parts of the 
County: 


Early Dynastic (ad) Term applisd to the first major phase of Egyptian history, 
"comprising the firt two or (in this book) three dynasties: increasingly favoured as an 
alternative to the term Archaic. 

EBI (n. and adj) Early Bronze Age 1. An archaeological period (divided into an earlier 
phase EBls and a Iter phase BID) applied to the Near East, c: 3600-3000 BC; it 
follows the Chaleollfhic, and corresponds to the Naqada I and Naqada 1I1 periods in 
Eaypt 

EBI (r and adj) Early Bronze Age II. An archaeological period applied to the Near 
East, e. 3000-2700 BC: ir follows he EBI. 

canes (1) A group of nine deities, particularly those associated wih the creation my 
‘of Heliopolis (Atm, Shu, Tefnut, (ich, Nut, Osiris, sis, Sela and Nephthys) 

entrept 6.) A location which acts as a collection and processing centre for incoming 
commodities, especially trade goods. 

epigraphy (o) The study, style or Iechnique of ancient inscriptions. 

eplthet (r) A descriptive word or phrase, ofien applied to 3 god 

eponymous (0) Giving its name o something. (For example, in the royal anal, cach 
Year is designated by one or more particular eponymous events.) 


‘fetish (1) A symbol or totem associated with a deity and believed to contain or invoke 
the supermakural power associated with that deity. 

Rall (r) A short rod with tuo or more pendant sips o¢ sings of beads attached to it; 
penhaps originally a shepherd's whip for geading his flock, the flail became part of he 
royal insignia om late Prada times. 

funerary enclosure (1) Ar Abydos, Hierskonpolis and Saqqara, a large, rectangular 
‘cour, either surmounded by solid walls of mudbrick or masonry, or delineated by lines 
of graves; an enclosure was probably intended 1o serve as a foeus for he mortuary cult 
ofthe king who built i (although other purposes have been suggested), un is likely 1o 
have bee provided with addidonal structures inside, cither temporary or permanent; 
funerary enclosures are sometimes called ‘funerary palaces" 


gegira (a) Abie name for û low, sandy hil, rising above the Nile Moodplain: such 
‘features, also called “turtle-tocks', are particularly common in the eastera Nile Delta 
where they provide suitable Iscations for early settlement. 

glazed composition (1. and adî) A more securate term than “faience, used to deseribe 
he glassy material composed of crushed quartz with small amounts of lime. plan 
ash or natron, and colouring agent Roms which solve offerings and other small 
Objects were male throughout Egyptian history. 


Hanmitie (44).) Belonging to the grouping of north African languages or cultures which 
‘includes, amongst others, ancient Egyptian and Berber. 

mierarehleal sealing (4) A syste use in ancient Egyptian art to indicate the relative 
‘status of human figures, hereby the larger he gure, he greater is importance. 


Horus (ın) An ancient sky god, depicted as a falcon (in later periods as a human figure 
‘wih the head of a falco). Horus was closely associated with kingship om the 
earliest period of receded history: according to ancient Egyptian ideology, he king 
was the earthly iacamation of Horus; the image of Horus stop the Kings principal 
name (ıereth) proclaimed this identity. 


iconography (n) A system of symbols and motifs used ia a consistent way, above all to 
express notions of theology and ideoloey. 

1deogram (r) A hieroglyphic sign that stands for a concept o¢ a whole word rather! 
letter or syllable. 

inundation (0:) Before the coastuctioa of he Aswan dams in moder times, he annual 
flocding ofthe River Nile which seaewed the fertility of the land: the Rocdwaters rose 
in July and receded again la September. 


ka (ıı) Ancient Egyptian term for the creative life-force which survived the physical 
deuih of a person sad sequined sustenance in the aferlife; he royal ka was the divine 
essence of kingship wihich passed st the death of a king direclly to his successor, 
inhabiting his body and giving him the supematural powers associated with the nuler. 

kig lst (£) A list compiled ia ancient times recording the names and order Of 
‘Succession of Egyptian Kings, sometimes with addiğonal infomation shout reise 
lengths and salen events; with the possible exception of he Turn Canon, King lists 
were not intended as objective hitorieal documents, bur were compiled to promote a 
parieular vie of kingship, stressing the unbroken line of rulers from the beginning of 
time; hence, foreign kings and others who were viewed by posterity as illegiinate 
Were excluded fron ihe king lists at Abydos, Karmak and Sagqara. 


label (1) A small rectangular picee of wood, bone or ivory, inserîbed with characters and 
attached to an object by means of a picee of sting threaded through a hole in one 
comer of the label. The inscription might denote the quantity, provenance, ownership 
or eoatents of the object. More elaborate year lahels carried additional information 
about the date of the labelled object 

1appet (a) A fap or pendulous sidexpiece of a wig. 

Lower Egypt (+) The northem part of the Egyplian Nile valley together with the Nile 
Deta, fram the Fayum entrance in the soul to the Mediterranean Sen; it includes the 
Memphiie region. 


Mast (+) Ancient Egyptian for ‘truth, justice’. The concept of correct behaviour and 
‘Cosmic onder which Ht was the King's primary duy to uphold and defend against the 
forees of chaos. la later periods, Maat was characterised ss a goddess ia her own righ. 

ımaceheaê (1) The solid ehd of a mace, conical dise-shape or por, perforated By a 
hole for the shaft; male Rom clay or, more frequently, stone, msecheads were potent 
symbols of authority in late Predynase and Earl) Dynastic Egypt; ceremaial 
ımaceheads were made as vehicles of iconography; but were not intended for practical 


magazine (1) A sore-room. 


magaetometry (1) A mehod of remote sensing using a device (magnetometer) that 
detects buried features by the slight distortions they produce in the car's magnelie 
eld. 

‘Main Deposit’ (r) Name given to a large collection of vote objects unearihed at 
Hierakoapolis at the end of the nineteenth century in circumstances which remain 
unclear, many of the objects date to the period of unification, including the famous 
Seocpion macehead and Narmer Palerre” other artefacts may be somewhat later in 
ale 

marl clay (1, Calcareous clay used to emake pottery which is generally iner, hander and 
less porous than potery made fron alluvial Nile clay; the production of marl clay 
pos, centred around Qena in Upper Egypt, required more advanced ceric 
ehnology and its inception murks an important stage in the process of culuural 
development during the lute Predynastic period. 

mastaba 0. Afabic 5¢ ‘bench. Name given to a tansb with a rectangular superstructure 
whose walls slope slightly inwards; in the Earl Dnanic period mustabas were 
constructed for both royal and private individuals; the external walls of maslabas were 
ıofien deeocated ia he ‘palace joçade' style. 

Memphite (uj, Belonging to the city oe regica of Memphis, he capital of ancient EYP 
fiom the beginning of the First Dynasty. 

Menes frome) According to later Egyptian tradition (including the New Kingdoms King 
ens), the first King of Egypt, credited by Herodotus with diverting the course of the 
Nile and founding he ety of Memphis; Menes may be a semi-legeadary gure, or 
may be a conflation of more than one King; he has been identihed both with Narimer 
wand wilh his successor Aha. 

Middle Egypt () A rather imprecise geographical term, applied o the stretch of the 
Nile valley bewecn the entrance 1o the Fayuen and the THrle region; corresponds to 
northernmost Upper Ep 

mummiform (adj) Shaped like a mumry; that is, a human figure 
‘bandages. 


bly wrapped in 


Naqada culture (r) Modem name given to the Predynastlc cultural tradition of Upper 
"Egypt, afer he important setleanent and cemeteries at Naqada. noch of Luxor. 

necropolis (r) A large burial ground, often comprising several cemeteries of distinct 
‘cemetery areas. 

Nealithle (a an aj) New Stone Age’. An archaeological period, characterised by the 
‘use of stone tools and the replacement of hunting and gathering by agriculture as he 
primary means of subsistence; the Neolihic is followed in the Near East by the 
Chaleollihic and EBI. in Egypt by the Predynasilc period. 

thie subpluvial fa.) A geological period of increased rainfil over Egypt; its end, e 

3300 BC. was marked by the desiccation of the dese savanna and a probable iu 
of population into the Nile valley. 

nome (4) A province and administrative division of Egypt; Upper Eaypt was divided 
into 2 nomes, Lower Egypt into 20; the origins of the nome system probably go baek 
to the First Dynasiy, and he system was fully developed ia the carly Old Kingdom 


xe 


nswt-big (1) Ancient Egyptian for ‘he of the sedge and bee'. Title bome by Egyptian 
Kings, 10 expres the miny dualities over which they ruled; oflen ranslated ‘King of 
Upper and Lower Egyypl', though ‘ual King is perhaps more accurate, 


obsidian (4) A hard, blaek volesnic glass, used to make sharp cuting blades and fot 
inlays 


*palace-façade’ (aj) A style of architeetueal decoration used predominantly on tombs 
‘ofthe Early Dynaslic period whereby alternating recessed niches and buttresses give 
a panelled appearance 1o the facade of a building; the moif is believed 10 have 
imitated the external appearance of the carly soyal palace. 

Palermo Stone (r) Name given to the largest surviving fragment of an ancient annalt 
stone, now housed in he Archeological Museum in Palermo. 

palette (1) A at pice of silstone, designed for grinding mineral pigments to make 
cosmetics; carved la a wide variety of shapes, palettes are one of the most distinctive 
pes of anelact from Predynastle Egypt, during the period of state formation, 
elaborate ceremonial paleues were decorated with complex scenes; most famous of 
such objects is he Nanmer Palete. 

papyrus skiff (1) A lighweight boat made from papyrus reeds, used by the ancient 
Egyplians especially for ishing and hunting birds n marshland environments 

petrographie analysts (r) The scientific technique of examining thin seetioas Of pottery 
or roek under magnification to determine the mineral composition and hence, ofien, 
he provenance ofthe sample. 

ıphyle f1) 4 team of workers which served with oer teams on a rotational basis in the 
‘service of the royal palace or moctuary cult. 

piriform (aff) Pear-shaped, usually applied to macehead 

pelg 00) A territory under unified politieal coarol: applied to the kingdoms which 
came ilo existence before the wnlfîcarion of Egypt at the endl of he fourth millennium 
3 

pent (u) Ancient Egyptian for ‘king's estale'. A separate department of the 
‘administration responsible for the personal estes and income of the king; it was 
presumably concerned with supporting the king, the royal family and the royal retine, 
nd was probably under direct royal control. 

Predynastie (adj) Term applied to the period of Egyptian prehistory ending with the 
‘uotjicartan of Egypt and he advent of the First Dynasty. «- 3050 BC, the beginning of 
he Predynastic period is not so easily defined, but is ofien taken to coincide with the 
appearance of he NeolbiC Badarlan culrure in norhem Upper Egypt: in he 
Predynastic sequence of Upper Egypt the Badarian is followed by three major phases 
of the Naqadu culture , before ¢. 3300 BC, the Predynastie period in Lower Esp is 
characterised by a sequence of several indigenous material cultures 


ralsed relief (1) 4 technique of decoration, usually applied 10 walls, whereby the 
background is cıt away, leaving the figures andlor texts raised above the surrounding 
surface 

ıred erewa (1) The headdress worm by the king in his capacity as ruler of Lower Egypt, 
though perhaps of Upper Egyptian origin: called dirt (the sed one’) in ancient 


FEayptlan, the crown has a low front and a tall back projection with a coil protruding 
forwards from it 

ıreglster (1) In ancient Egyptian art, one of a series of horizontal compartments or strips 
“into which scenes were divide. 

ıreslstlvity (1) A melhod of remote sensing that detects buried features by passing an 
‘electical current through the soll and measuring changes in conductviy; such 
changes can be caused by the differential retention of groundwater that distinguishes 
bull features fiom thelr surroundings. 

rosettelpalmette (01) A symbol found on royal monuments from the period of 
‘tficarlan, resembling a dower wilh six or seven petals, of 4 crown of palm leaves 
viewed from above; i is thought to have signified the ruler. 


scarab (r) The dung-betle, viewed by the ancient Egyptians as û manifestation of the 
‘sun god amulets nd seals in the for of searabs were popular fro the ead of lhe Old 
Kingdom onwards. 

SRddesice (r) From the ancient Egyptian wond, an unidentilîed bag-or balloon-ahaped 
object of unknown origin whic is often shown attached to the front of the standard of 
the jackal god Wepwawet 

Sedestlval (1) The prweminent festival of kingship which served 1o renew and 
sejuvenate the king's powers throug a series of highly symbolic rinuals, 

sequence dating system (n) A system developed by he Briish archeologist Sir 
‘Flinders Petts for assigning relative dates t0 Prerbnastle graves, largely by mens Of 
their pottery; the system was bused upon the study of pots fom the cemeteries at 
Naqada, B alias and Diospolis Parva; lt selied on several assumptions, notably thal 
graves containing similar types of polery are close in date, and that certain classes of 
potery especially eilnder vessel and their forerunners, wavy-handled jars — 
underwent gratlual but continuous stylistic change. 

serdab (+) Arabic for ‘cellar’. The foomm in a mastaba tomb here a statue of the 
"deceased seas placed to act as a resting place for the ka; the room was often provided 
wilh ‘eye-holes', giving the Aa access 1o the statue and allowing the statue 10 look 
ou’; the earliest serdlzb is in the Step Pyramid complex of Netjerikhet, from the 
beginning of the Third Dynasty. 

serekl (0. Ancient Egyptian word for the rectangular device, represent 
‘he royal palace:façadie, which served ss a feme enclosing the King's 
esere is usually surmounted by the figure of a leon. 

"Sedhcanlaal (n) The mysterious dogclike animal with a long snout, square-ended eats 
and upright, forked tail which embodied and signified the god Sed; it has been 
ariously enticed as an anteatet, pig, dog of wild ass, but probably represents & 
composite or entirely mythical erealure. 

sher f1) A piece of broken pottery. 

“Shunet ez-Zebib (1) Arabic for ‘storehouse of raisins’. Nickname given to the massive 
Jinerury enclosure of mmudbtick Bult for the last King of the Second Dynasty: 
Khasekhenmwy, st Abydos. 

ıltstone (1) A VEY fine-grained, green-grey rock, used especially for the manufacture Of 
elaborate stone vessels ia the Erb Dynastle period (erroneously called ‘slate’ 


section of 
ors name; the 


‘schist or ‘greyuracke’ by earlier authors): he main source of this sock was the Wadi 
Hammamat i {he easter dese. 

social stratification (1) The division of a community into a hierarchy of social classes, 
‘based upon differences in status; The presence of social stratilicalion is generally taken 
as an indication that a society is becoming inerensingly complex and is moving 
Howards stu formalion. 

ıstela (plural stelae) (» A slab of stone or (less often) wood, usually rectangular with & 
rounded top, bearlag inseriptions andor figursive scenes; stelee served funerary, 
sti and coanmemertive purposes, and could also be erected as boundary markers. 

srstlgraphle (0d) Relating to the sequence of layers (strut), their onder and 
Significance (sratigrapy), on an archaeological site. 

ısubeldlary burial (1 A smal grave, ususlly one of a group, secompanying the tonıb of 
ıa king or high oficial, or a royal funerary enclosure; he servants and retainers 
interred in subsidiary burials would secompany thelr master or mistress lato the 
ıaffeclite to continue their service. 

seretan (4) The idenifestion or fusion of two (or more) deities to produce a 
‘compound deity incorpoenting auribures fom both (oc all) its ‘parent’ gods; am 
example of easly syncretism is the close identification of the goddesses Bat and 
Hathor 

"Syria-Palestine (4) Geographical term applied by Eyplologists 10 the area of the Near 
"East eompkising the modem counties of Iriel, Lebanon, Syria and weste Jordan. 


tell (x) Arabic for ‘hil’, ‘mound’. An archaeological site, especially in the Nile Dela, 
where the accumulation of cultural material over centuries has resulted in 3 mound 
visible above the surrounding area. 
Talalte fad) Belonging to he city or royal house of This/Thinis, capital of the Abydos 
‘region rom Predjmasite times and ancestral hom of he First and Second Dynasties. 
@nulary (u) The collected tiles and names bome by a King. comprising a number Of 
‘separate and disinetive elements; Early Dynastic royal tinslaries comaprised the Honus 
ile (orien with the sereki), "Tuo Ladies” tile, asuf-biy tile and the ‘Golden 
Horus’ title; the name which followed the lust of these came to be writen in a 
carouche. 

transliteration (1) The rendition into the Roman alphabet (with some additional special 
‘signs and acces) of ancient Egyptian wrocds, using a standard system: this allows 
ancient Egyptian wonds to be written when a hieşoglyphic font is not available, and to 
be ‘pronounced following certain eoaventions: 


3 sands for a sound which occurs in Hebrew and Arabic but not in English, a linke like 
ihe glotal stop; conventionally pronounced like the a in ‘car’ 

ıi another sound common in Hebrew and Arabic but not in English; Like the English 
conventionally pronounced like The in ‘bit 
sands for the equivalent of the Hebrew and Arabic letter ayin, not found in English; a 
gutmueal sound made in the back of the throat; eoaventionally pronounced like the a in 
ear, so dillicult to distinguish in ‘spoken ancient Egyptian fiom 3 

A an aspirıteû, emphatic #; often pronounced like a normal A 

J like the ch in Seouish ‘loc and conventionally pronounced as such 


# rather sofer han A, more like the ck în Geman ‘ici’; sometimes pronounce more 
like he cl in ‘chaos 

ısands for a single letter correspoading to slr as in ship, proaunced sh 

ıa gottural # sound made in the back of the throat; ofen pronounced like a normal £ 

usually said to represent the sound ch as in ‘chair’, and convetionally pronounced a6 

sueh; bur perhaps more like as in ‘meet you 

usually said 1o represent the sound / as in ‘jan’, and conveationally pronounced a6 

sueh; but perhaps more ike 4h; as in “feel you" 


To assist pronunciation of ancient Egyptian words in transliteration a neutral 
vowel (e as in bed) is generally inserted between adjacent consonants, while w— 
when it occurs in the middle or at the end of a word_is pronounced like the u in 
nime. Hence, pr-nswr is pronounced pernesut 


travertine (û andl ali) The yellowish or white translucent stone, technically calcium 
Carbonate, ofien calla “Egyptian alabaster’; it was mined at Hatmub in northern Upper 
Egypt and was widely used for stone vessel rmunufacture. 

triad (1, A statue comprising a gıvup O three figures. 

tamalus (4, A low, rounded artificial mound, 

Turin Canon (4) Name given to a agmentary papyrus, now in the Egyptian Museum in 
Turin, inscribed with a King lls compiled in the reign of Ramesses II (e. 1270-1213 
“BCJ; unlike other King lists, the Turin Canon seems to have aimed at completeness. 

“Two Ladies’ (1.J Teanslaricn of the ancient Egyptian word by, referring to the wo 
protector deities of Upper Egypt and Lower Exypt: the vulture goddess Nekhbet of 
ikab, and the cobra goddess Wadjet of Buo; Rom the late First Dynasty, the “Two 
Ladies’ foamed one of the king's titles, expressing the geographieal dualixy ûf his nile; 
some Early Dynashc Kings bore a distinctive Two Ladies name, writen after this 
ile. 


Umm ekQaab (1) Arıbie for ‘mother of pats’ (fiom he huge quantities of later 
offering-pottery which sill liter the site). The name given by Egyptologists to the 
desert cemetery at Abydos in Upper Egypt wihere the kings of the First Dynasty and 
he last wo kings of the Second Dynasty were buried 

unification (r, Term applied to the formation of he ancient Egyptian state, ¢. 3100 BC 
ıa lengthy and gradusl process rather than 3 siagle, swif event, unification involved the 
coalescence of a number of territories to form a single country fiom the Mediterranean 
coast lo lhe First Cataract at Elephantine. 

Upper Egypt (2) The southem half of the Egyptian Nile valley, from the Fayum 
entrance ıa the north to Elephantine in the south the northeeaost sirete, north of he 
Tilnite region, is sometimes called Middle Egypt. 

ıuraeus (1) The figure Of rearing cobra which adored the brow of the king to give him 
‘magical protection; in Early Dynastic inscriptions, the uracus also appears on the 
standard of the jackal god Wepwawet 


vizier () Name given by Egyptologists to the person 
‘sdministrarion who bore the titlels) (237 
well as political authority. 

votive (a) Donated o express or reinforce a wish or prayer. 


the head ofthe ancient Egyplian 
3) 3 the position entailed judicial as 


wad (r) A dry valley, ofien anurking the course of a torrent during rare rainstoens. 

white crown (1. The headdress wom by the king in his capacity as ruler of Upper 
Egy: called û ¢ (the white one’) in ancient Egyptian, the crown is tall and conical 
in shape with a bulbous ip. 


year label (1) An elaborate type of label, on which specific events are depicted in oeder 
“to identify the year and hence date the ataehed commodity; year labels provide mueh 
of our evidence fur Early Dynastic history; year hibels sce also referred 10 by he 
German term lahrestifelchen. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ABBREVIATIONS OF SERIES AND PERIODICALS 


Aa Ãgyptologische Abhandlungen. 

dgpen  unddppien und Levaue. Zelschrit fir Agptsehe Archiologie und 

Levante deren Nachbargebiete. 

AM Amerleon Journal of Archacolog: 

Anike Welt Ancike Welt Zeltschrif fur Archdologie und Kulturgeschlehte: 

ASE Amales hı Service des Antlqulnês de 1'Ezyple. 

Aqo “Alot (lerael Department of Antiquities. 

AVDAIK  Archîologische Verbftenlichungen, Deutsches Archfologisehes 
‘stitut, Abteilung Kaleo. 

BASOR Bullen ofthe Anerican Schools of Orental Research 

Biblical Biblical Archaeologist. Perspeetives on the Ancient World from 

Arehacologlst Mesopotamia 1o the Mediterranean 

BIFAO Bullen de I ‘lnstinut Frunçuls d Archiologle Orientale. 

Cal Ciranique d ‘ype. 

Catt Comptes Rendus 4 Academie des Inseriprlons et Belles Lettres. 

Eptian, Egpilan Archaeology: The Bulletin of the Egypt Exploeation Society. 

Archaeology 

Betzlerael  Erete-lrael Archaeological, Historical and Geographical studies. 


of the University Museum of the University 


Bepedilon Expedition. The Bull 
of Pennsylvania 
Geugraphical (Royal Geographical Society). 


aural 
aM Gitinger Miszellen. Beitrige zur kgyptologischen Diskussion. 
HÃB Hildesheimer Agyplologische Beitrige. 

2 lerael Exploration Journal 

ray (British School of Archaeology in aq) 

MRCE Joumal of the American Research Center i Etypt 


Jounal of Eigypion Archaeology! 
Jowmal of Near Easter Saudis 

‘Jounal of the Sociely for the Study of Eg pion Antiquities 

Kêmt Revue de Philologie et d'Arebtologie Egypti-ennes ct Coptes. 
KIT A Modem Joumal of Ancient EgYPL 

Lexikon der Agypologie. (Vol. 1: els W.Helck and E. Oo; Vols 11 
VI: eds W.Helck and W.Westendorn 

Laem Lenn Joumal of he Bftish Schosl of Arthacology in Jerusalem. 


Man Man. A Monthly Record of Anthropological Science (Royal 
‘Aarthropological Institute). 
wks Mûnchner Agyplologische Studien. 
MDAK Maeihongen des Deuschen Archdologlschen stluts, Abvellung 
Kal. 
Nume Akuma Nyame Akuma. Bulletin ofthe Society of African Archasologists. 
oko Oudhekltuundige Mededeelingen uit het Rijksmuseum van Oudlheslen 
te lallen. 
Oriemalia - Oemalla, Nova Series. 
PSR Proceedings of the Soelety of Biblical Anchaeolog! 
RE Revue d Egplologie. 
SAK Studien aur Aldgoptlschen Kaur. 
Selene (American Association for the Advancement of Scienet) 
Spi Sphinr. Reve Critique Embrassant le Domine Entier de 
TEaypiologie. 
2s Zelsehrif fir Îgyprlsche Sprache uni Aternonstunde 
Abdel Tawrab, M, Castel, G, and Pouit, G. (1990) ‘Archêogtologie des anciennes mines 
“de euiwre et d'or des regions el-lUrMongul-Sud et Darr-Ouest', BIFAO 90350-61, 
gs LIS. 


Adams, B. (I977) ‘Hieeakonpalis', LA 11: 1182-6. 

(987) The Fort Cemetery uf Hierakonpolls, London: Kegan Paul Intemational 
Studies in Egyptoloey. 

(1994) ‘Possible s3-signs fron the tomb of Djet (Uadjî)' JE4 SO:183-7. 

o {1905) Ancient Nether Garstang hr he City of Hierakonpolis New Malden: Sia 
Publishing, Egyptian Studies Association Publication No, 3. 

(1996) "Ete graves at Hierakoapolis' in Spencer (ed) Apec of Early Egapt, 1~ 
15, pls 1, Sa. London: British Museum Press, 

Adams, B. and Friedenan, R.F. (1992) ‘Imports and influences in the Predpnastie and 
Protodynastie setlement and funerary assemblages at Hierakonpolis’, in ECM. van 
den Brink (ed) The Nile Delta lr Tunstiion: 40-30d millennum BC, 317-38. Tel 
Aviv: van den Brink 

Adams, B. and Porat, N. (1996) ‘Imported pottery with potmmurks fiom Abydos, in 
Spencer (ed) Apeett of arly Eqop, 98-107, pls 16-21. London: British Museums 
Press. 

Adams, W.¥. (1977) Nubia, Corridor 1o Affica, London: Allen Lane. 

o {IÖRS) ‘Doubts about the “Lost Pharaohs, IVES 44:185-92. 

Aldred, C. (1965) Ep! to the End of the Old Kirgdlan, London: Thames and Hudson. 
Libcary ofthe early civilizations. 

Alexanian, N. (n.d) "The excavation of the MMA-Egyptian Expedition at the so-called 
“oa” at Hierakoapalis in 1935: The reliefdeeceution of King Khasekhemu' 
manuscript oa fle wit the author. 

floss) ‘Die Reliefdekaratioa des Chaseehemui aus dem sogenmanten Fort in 
Hierakonpolis', in N.Grimal (ed )JLes Ciirer de Datation Spltiques a 1 Ancien 
Enplre, 2I, pls 1$. Cairo: FAO, Bibliotheque &'Enude 120. 


Algaze, G. (1993) The Uruk World Setem. The Dnamles of Expunsion of Early 
‘Mesopotamian Civilisation, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. 

Alienmûller, B. (1977) “Harsaphes’, LA 1: 1015-1 

Alenmûller, H. (1972) ‘Bemeikungea zur fûben und piles Bouphase des 
Djoserbezirkes in Saqqara’, MDAIK 28-1-12. 

STS) Bunisehes Begribais, LA 1: S87. 

(1976) ‘Das Olmagazin im Cirab der Hesire in Saqqara (QS 2045), SAK 4: 1-26. 

Amêlineau, E. (1899) Les Nouwelles Fouled Abul 1895-1406, Paris: Ermest Leroux. 

(902) Les Nouwelles Fouilles d ‘Abyss. Seeonde Campagne 1896-1807. Paris: 
Emest Laroun 

(1904) Les Nounelles Foullles d'Abydos 1807-1808, Paris: Emest Leroux. 

905) Les Nounelles Fowles d Abydos 1897-1808 (Dewriême Parle), Panis: 
Emest Leroux. 

Amira, (1974) ‘An Egyptian jar fragment with the name of Narmer fron Ardî, 1EJ 
4-12 

(1976) ‘The Narmer jar fragment from Arad: an addendum’, EJ 26:45-6, 

(91) Early Aral: The Chalcollahie Senlement and Early Bronse Age Cit 1 Flr: 
Fifth Seasons of Eremanons, 1962-1966 Jecusalem: Israel Exploration Society: 
Judean Desert Studies 2 

{I985 ‘Canaanite merchants in tombs of the Early Bronze Age 1 at Azor’, Algor 
(English Series) 17-1902. 

Amiran, Rand Gophna, R (1992) "The correlation between Lower Egypt and southern 
Canaan during the EB 1 Period, ia EC-Mvan den Brink (e4) The Nile Dela lr 
Translrlon: dih-3rl Millenium BC. 357 €0. Tel AV: van dea Bink. 

Anderson, W. (1992) ‘Badarian burials: evidence of social inequaliey in Middle Egypt 
during the early Predlynaslic era’, HRC 29:51-66. 

Andres, W. and Wunderlich, 1. (1992) ‘Environmental conditaons for carly settlement at 
"Minshat Abu Omar, eastem Nile Deka, Egypt’, in EC-M.van den Brink (ed) The Nile 
Delta fa Transiion: 40h. 3d Milewnhon BC. 157-66. Tel Aviv: van den Brink 

Anhes, R (1957) ‘Die Soanenboote in dea Pyramidenexten. ZS 82-77-80. 

Arkell, AJ (1956) ‘Stone bowls of Kha'ba (Third Dynasty)", JEA 42:116. 

{SSE ‘Stone bowls of Kha ba (Third Dynasty), JEA 44:120. 

Amol, D. (1982) ‘Perwer II L4 IV: 934-5. 

(904) Lericon der Agyptlsckene Bowens, Zirich: Anemis. 

Asselberghs, H. (1961) Chor en beheersing Documemen ult Aeneolithlsch Egypte 
Leiden: EJB. 

Aston, BG. (1994) Ancient Egyprlan Sone Vessels: Materials and Forms, Heidelben 
Heidelberger Orienrverlag. Studien aur Ktchiologie und Geschichte Aklgyplens 5. 
Ayrton, E.R. and Lost, WLS. (1911) Pre-Dmasie Cemetery ar E! Makas, London: 

Egypt Exploration Fund. Memoir 31, 

Ayrton, ER, Currely, CT, and Weigall, AE.P. (1904) Abydos, Part Il London: Ezypt 

Exploration Fund. 


Badauy, A, (1956) The ideology of the superstructure of the mastaba-tonmb in EayPI', 
NES 15:180 3 

Baines, J. (1991) ‘Egyptian myth and discourse: myth, gods and the early writen and 
ieonographic reeord. IVES 30:1105 

oes) ‘Origins of Egyptian kingship’, ia D.O'Connor and D.Siverman (eds) 
Ancient Eyptlun Kngsp: 95-156. Leiden: EJ. Brill 

Baines, J. and Milek, J. (1980) Alas of Ancien Eruupt. Oxford: Phaidon. 

Balcz, H. (1930) ‘Die altigypisehe Wandgliederung', Miuellungen des Deuschen 
esrituts fur Agyptlsche Alteruanstunde tr Kolro (later MDAIK) 1:38 2. 

Baity, L-C. de Meulenuene, H, Homês-Frederieg, D., Lime, L., Strybol, J. and vanden 
Berghe, L. (I988) Musies Ropau d Art et d Hisrolre Bruxelles, Anlqsitê. Brussels: 
Muses Kost. 

Band, K.A, (1987) The geography of excavated Predynastic sites and the rise of complex 
ısociely', ARCE RLS. 

foe) A quniitaiîve analysis of he Predynastie burials in Amant Cemetery 
1400-1500". EA D-5. 

(1992) Towanls an interpretation of the role of ideology in the evolution of complex 
society in Egypt’ Jounal of Andlvopalogicul Archaeology 11:1-24. 

(ond) Frum Furmers 1o Pharaohs. Mortuary Evidence for the Rie of Complex 
“Soelen; Shelicd. Shefield Academic Press. 

Bard, KA. and Cameiro, RL. (1989) “Parteens of Predynastie settlement location, social 
evolution and the circumscription theory. Callers de Recherches de ‘insti! de 
Papyrologie et d Egyptologte de Lille TI:15-23. 

Barge, P. (1953) La Sale de lu Famine, û Shel Cairo: IFAO. Bibliotheque d'Etude 24. 

Baurecas, C, Fattovich, R. and Tosi, M (1989) The Oriental Institute of Naples expedition 
1o Perie's South Town (Upper Egy, 1977-1983: an interim report, in 
LKrzyzaniak and MKobusievicz (eds) Lale Prehistory af he Vile Basin and the 
Sahar, 295-301. Poznan: Poznan Atrhaeological Museum Studies in Afiican 
Archaeology 2. 

Barsantî, A. (I902) ‘Fouilles autour de la pyanmide d'Ounas (1901-1902)', ASAE 3:182 
4 

Banta, W. (1975) Uersuchngen 
Berlin: Bruno Hessling. MAS 32 

loki ‘Die Chronologie der 1. bis S. Dynastie nach dem Angaben des 
sekonstruierten Annaleasteias', ZS 108.2333 

f I990) ‘Der Palasthorusitel und seine Vorlkuîer in der Frîhzeit', GM 117/1 18:55-90. 

Baumgartel, EJ. (1970) Peırie ‘x Nagada Ereavarion 4 Supplement, London: Quarieh. 

(I975) ‘Some remarks on the origins of the lles of he Archaic Egyption kings’, 
JEANS 

Beckerath, 1 von (1956) ‘Smdj-Hw in der Azyptischen Vor- und Frlhze 
10. 

— 1980) *Honusgeleit, LA 11E S1-2 

Behrman, A. (1989) Dos Nipferd in der Vorstelhotgnelt der alien Agypter, 1, 
Frankfurt Peter ` Lang Furopaische Hochschulschrifien, Reihe XXXVI 
(Arenîologie), Band 22. 


Gûliehelt des reglerenden Kings, Munich and 


DAIR 141 


Beic-Arieh, 1. (1984) ‘New evidence on the relations between Canaan and Egypt during 
the Proto-Dymastie period, 1EJ 34:203. 

Bell, B. (1970) The oldest records of the Nile Moods, Geographical Journal 136: 569 
7 

Ben-Tor, A. (1991) ‘New light on the relations between Egypt and southem Palestine 
“during the Early Bronze Age’, Tel Aut, TI:II-19, and BASOR 381: 3 10. 

Beles, E. Clarke, 1, Dimer, 1, Duhig, C., Ikram, S, Mathieson, 1, Smith, H. and 
Tavares, A. (1995) Notonal Ahuseums of Seosland Saggara Project Report 1995, 
Edinburgh: National Museums of Seotland. 

Bivak, M. (975) Tell ekDabu, IL Der Fundort im Rahmen einer 
archîologischgeogrophlachen Untersuchung diber das agyptlsche Qutdelta, Vienna: 
Verlag der Ostereichisehea Akademie der Wissenschaften Denkschrif der 
Gesamtakademie 4, 

(1979) “Urban archeology and the “tourn problems" in Ancient Egypt’, ia K.Weeks 
(e4) Rpprology amd he Social Selences, 97-144. Cairo: The American University in 
Cairo Pros. 

{9) “Zu den beiligen Bezirken mit Palmen ia But und Sals_Ein 
archiologischer Befund aus dem mileren Reich’, in M-Bictak, J Holaubek, H 
Mukarovsky, and H Sazinger (eds) Zwsehen den beiden Eutglejten. Festschrift 
Gertrud Thauuihg, 1-18. Vienms: Eigenverlag des stinwtes fur Agyptologie der 
Universit Wien. 

Blackman, AM. (1916) ‘Some remarks on an emblem upon the head of an ancient 
Eayplian birthxgoddess', JEA 3:199-206. 

Boehmer, RM. (1974) ‘Orientalisehe Einflisse auf verzienen Messergtiffen aus dem 
pridynasischen Agypten', Archdologtrche Minellungen aus Inan 7:15-40, 

Bonnet, H. (1928) £ln pihgaschichliches Gribefeld hef Austr: Leipzig: JC Hinrichs 
"Verûffenliehungen der Ernst von Sieglin Expedition in Agypten 4. 

Borehardt, L (1898) ‘Das Grab des Menes', ZS 3687-105. 

(1917) Die Annalen und die seiilleke estlegwng des alien Reichs der digyptlschens 
Geschichte, Berlin: voa Behrend. Quellen un Forsehungen zur Zeltbestirmmnung der 
Agyplischen Geschichte 1 

Boumiau, J. (1981) Um cLOu ‘ab. Poery fiom the Nile Valley Before he Arab 
"Conquest, Cambridge: Firwiliam Museum. 

Brandl, B. (1992) ‘Evidence for Egyptian colonization of the southem coastal plain and 
‘Îowlands of Canaan during the Early Broaze 1 Period, in E.C.M.van den Brink (ed) 
The Nile Deha n Transition: 3rd Millemium BC: 441-76. Tel Aviv: van den 
Brink 

Brewer, DJ. and Wenke, RI. (1902) ‘Transitional late Predynastic-Early Dynastic 
‘occupations st Mendes: a preliminary report, in EC.M van den Brink (ed) The Nile 
Delt fa Transiton 404-31 Milewshen BC. I918. Tel Aviv: van den Brink 

Brink, ECM van den (1949) °A transitional Late Predlynastic-Early Dynastic setlement 
‘sl in the northeastern Nile Delt MDAIK 45-55 108. 

(I992) "Prelice and short introduction’, in EC-Mvan den Beink (ed) The Nile 
“Delta fn Transom: 4-3 Millen BC. virviii Tel Aviv: van den Brink. 


gio) ‘Preliminary repo o the excavations a Tel Tbrahim Awat season I98 
I E CAlvas de Bia (eû Pe MI Del e Puro N B Seun 
BC a a Tel RN van len Bek 

ioe The aged wereUê ens of Dyrmsies 0-1, Prt 1: complete veel ia 
Spencer O Apec a r ROY 14 S8. pla 24-32 Loon BRN uns 

fa peepemiaa) ‘Toe eral sigs of Dynasties 0-1. Pan 1l Gagmens' 

arl EC Mian de (eû COB he Solace oF he NIL Dela. Problems andl 
Pion, Anaterca Nebuctsdt Fouica FR caartlogica Rear EE. 

RY TONE) Te Ne Dela O Tension Bd Sonn BC. Tol RON 
aes Bink 

Bila J (I979) Die Bnsietlng der kilglcen Grahanlaget des Alet Relies 
ahen Gantenhe HA 10 

Broan E (OEY Nad (Nag YeDê', LIV: 296-317. 

beta) ‘Sal LIV 9 80. 

ib Soak LIV o08 10n 

loke) Tinie, LIVE 47 s6 

Brinlon O. USE) Ga dd Bader 1, Laden: rti Sehool of Archaeology ia Eyê 
cand Quariek 

SDT Mategella and the Talon Cure (aril Museum pedi to Middle 
Rope and xecond yes 1O GS) Lamon Quek 

PRAY aoe, Ch ase Epcos o MIL: opr 1020-1931) London: 

ا 

Bric, û, and Cıton- Thorpe, O. (1928) Tie Radarien Civilarlon and Predynastle 
‘Remains Nor Badart London. Bells Seal OC Autaaslek tx E 

Bryer BCI Fo Efo Cal 1FAO Fouls anes iletakes Rapport 1 

Burgess EN and Ae A J (I951) The ecoastndin othe Huth bow. ZEA 4416- 
1 


Capa, 1 (1930) Menphls d 1 Onhre des Pyramldes, Brussels: Fondation Eayptologique 
Reine Elisabeth. 

Cameirm, KL. (1970) *A theory of he origin ofthe state’, Science 169:733-8. 

Case, H. and Payne, 1C. (1962) Tomb 100: he decorated tomb at Hierakonpolis', JE4 
aS 18 

Castel, G., Mathieu, B., Hélal, H,, Abdallah, T. and Hawary, M, el- (1992) ‘Les mines de 
'cuire du Oud Dara. Rapport preliminaire sur les tnwvaux de la saisoa 1991 IFAC 


9251 65 
Catoa-Thompson, G. (1952) Kharga Oust in Prehistory, London: University of 
London The Aihlone Press. 


Cênival, JL de (1965) ‘Un nouveau fragment de la pierre de Palerme', Bullet dle la 
Socltê Frunçulse d ‘ey plologie 44:1317. 

Chlodlnieki, M, Fatovîch, R. an Salvator, $. (1992) Te Nile Delta in transition: a view 
fiom Tell eLFarkhe', i» E.C.M van den Brink (ed) The Nile Delta in Tronskion: Ath 
“r Mlenhon BC. 171-90. Tel Aviv: van den Brink. 


Cinlowiez, K.M. (1991) Les Tiles de Matuves des Piriades Pridpnastique et Archalinue 
‘Dus la Vallée du NIL Keakow Uniwersytet Jagiellonski. 

Clarke, E.S. (1921) ‘El-Kêb and the Great Wall" JE 7:54-9. 

Cıélal, J. (1914) Les vases de El-Beda', ASAE 3-115-21 

Clee, J.-J. (1938) ‘Un graffîto du roi Djct dans le desen arabique', ASAE 38: 85-93. 

Cohen, R. (1978) ‘Stale origins: a reappeaical', in H.JMClaessen and P.Skalnk (eds) 
The Early State, 31-75. The Hague: Mouton. 

Cooney, ID. and Simpson, W.K. (1976) “An Early Dynastic sare of he goddess 
"Heqa, Bulletin of the Cleveland Muusexon of Arts 63:202 9. 

Cura, 5. (1953) ‘Nota su un silievo proveniente da Gebelên nel Museo Egizio dî Torino’, 
‘Aegoprus (Riva liallana di Eglnologla e di Paplrologia) 33:105-24. 


Daresey, G. (1905) ‘Un édiîce archalque a Nezlct Baran’, ASAE 6:990-106. 

{I916 ‘La pierre de Palerme et la chronologic de Ancien Empire’, BIFAO 12:161 
214 

Durmeli, D. and Darnell, J. (1997) ‘Exploring the “narrow doors" of the Theban desert’ 
Egyptian Archaeology 1024-6. 

Davies, N. de G. (1943) Te Tomb of Relimlre ar ebe, 2 volumes, New York: The 
Metropolitan Museu of At 

Davis, W. (1989) The Canonical Tradition lr Ancient Egyptian Art. Cambridge: 
'Cambeidge Univesity Press. Cambridge New AN History an Criticism 

(902) Masking he Blow: The Scene of Representation br Laie Prehistoric Egyptian 
Arı. Berkeley, CA: University of Califummia Press. 

Debono, F. and Mortensen, B. (I988) The Predpnasric Cemetery at Heliopolis, Mainz am 
Rhein: von Zabe. AVDAIK 63. 

(1990) EI Oman. 4 Neolithic Serlement and Other Sires ta the Viclnly of Wadi Hof: 
Hebs, Mainz am Rhein: von Zsbem. AVDAIK 82 

Decker, W (1992) Sports and Gumes of Ancient Ey trans. A. Ciuttmann, New Haven 

nû London: Yale University Press 

Delmas, A.B. and Casanova, ML. (1990) The lapis lazuli sources in the ancient Eas 
MTuddei (ed) Sow Aslan Archaeology 1987, 1 (Proceedings of he Nik 
mematlonal Conference of the Assocation of South Aslan Archaevloglsts ts Western 
Erape), 43-S05. Rome: lstiuto Italiano per il medio ed esteme oriente. Serie 
Orientale Roma 66, 1 

Dery, D.E (1956) The Dynastic race in Egypt’, JE4 A2:80-6. 

Dodson, A. (1996) The mysterious 2nd Dynisty, KUT 7, 2:19-31. 

Donadoni Roveri, AM. (1990) ‘Gebelein', in Robins (ed) Aeyond the Pyramids 
Eppilun Regional At From ie Muse Egizlo, Turin, 23 9 Atlanta: Emory 
University Museum of A and Archeology. 

Dreyer, G. (1981) “Ein frûhdynastisches Kênigsfigurchen aus Elephantine', MUDAIK 37 
(Festsehritt Habachî): 123-4, pl 16. 

o86) Elephomine VIL ‘Der Tempel der Satet. Mainz am Rhein: von Zabe. 
AUDAIK 39 

{IST ‘Ein Siegel der! 
4 


'ûhzeitlichen Königsnekropole von Abydos’, MDAIK 43:33 


—{1990) “Umm ek-Qaab, Nachutersuclhungen im frhzeitlichen Kênigsfiiedhol. 3/4 
Vorbericht, MDAIK 46:53-90. 

I991) "Zur Rekonstrukion der Oberhuuten der Kinigsgriber der 1. Dynastic in 
Abydos’, MDAIK 47 (Festschrif Kaiser: 03-104. 

—(oo2) “Hors Krokodil ein Gegenkönig der Dynastie O", in Friedman and 
B. Adams (eds) The Followen of Horus, Studies Dalleatel 1o Michael Allen Hofinan. 
259-63. Oxford: Oxbow. Monograph 20. Egyptian Studies Association Publication 
No.2. 

—{I9D2b) ‘Recent discoveries at Abydos Cemetery U’, in E.CM.van den Brink (od) 
The Nile Deha in Trunsilon: dih 3n Mileham BC. 2939. Tel Aviv: van den 
Bein 

(19936) ‘Umm el-Qanb. Nachuntersuchungen im frûhzeitlichen Kênigstiedhof. 516 
Vorbericht' MDAIK 49-23-62. 

o {ISP3b ‘A hundred years at Abydos’, Eyprlan Archaeology 310-12. 

—{19950) ‘Recent activites of he German Insitute of Archaeology in Egypt’ 
unpublished paper delivered at the Seventh ltemational Congress of Eeyptolopists, 
Cambeidge, 3 September 1995, (To be published in the Proceedings of the Seventh 
ICE) 

—{1P95b) ‘Die Datierung der Min-Statuen aus Koptos', in Deutsches Archfologisehes 
Iniwut Abteilung Kalo, Kunst der Alen Reichs: Swmpostan bn Deutschen 
Arekiologlschen hnstinut Kaleo am 20 und 30 Olober 1091. 49-56, pls 9-13. Mainz 
A Rhein vo Zabera. DAIK Soaderschrit 28. 

(1996) “Ein Tongefiss mit Frauenfiguren. Ein Neufund aus Abydos’, Antike Welt 
21,3242 

Dreyer, G. and Kaiser, W. (1980) ‘Zu den Kleinen Suufenpyramiden Oberund 
Mirelîgyptens', MDAIK 36443 

Dreyer, G. and Swelim, N. (1982) ‘Die kleine Saufenpyramide von Abydos-Sûd (Sink), 
CGrabungsbericht', MDAIK 38:83-93. 

Dreyer, G, Engel, EM, Harung, U., Hikade, T., Köhler, EC. and Pumpenmeie, F. 
(1956) ‘Ummm cl-gaah. Nachuntersuchungen ins Frîhzcitlichen Kûnigsîiedhof. 7V 
Vorbericht', MDAIK 52-11-81. 

Drieseh, A. von den (I986) Fuche in alen Agypten: eine asteoarchlologlsche 
‘Linteruchung, Munich: Kanzler. Documenta Nature 8, 

Dunham, D. (1978) Zawyer ekAryan Te Cemeteries Adjacent to the Layer Pyramid 
Boston: Museum of Fine Arts. 


Eaton-Krauss, M. (1977) The Khar headdress to the end of the Amam period’, SAK 
SI 

(9B) The Representations of Statuary ln Private Toms of ihe Ol Kingdom, 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. AA 39. 

Edwards, LE.S, (1971) The Early Dynastic period in Eeypt, in LE.S Edwards, C.J Gadd 
and N\G.Hammond (ads) Tie Cumhidlge Anclen Hiory; 34d editioa, Volume 1, 
Part 2, Early Hitory of he Middle East 1-70. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

—{1993) Te Pram of Egypt, Sth edition, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 


Emery, WR. (1938) Ercavorlons af Sagqanu: Tle Tomb of Hemaka, Cairo: Goveennent 
ht 

(930) Ereavarlons at Saqgara 1937-1938. Hor. Aka, Cairo: Government Press. 

lois) Grea Toms of tle Firs! Dynasty, 1, Calo: CGovemmnent Press 

(1954) Grea Touahs ofthe Firs Dnay, i, London: Egypt Explortion Society. 

lose) Grea Tuas ofthe Firs: Dynasty, 1, London: Ey Exploeatioa Society 

is1) Archale Hypt Harmondsworth: Penguin. 

lse) ‘Ey Explocatin Society. Preliminary separ oa the excavations st Ruben, 
162. Ku TIS 20. 

o flsês “Preliminary epo on the excavations at North Saqqara 1964-S', JE 51:3 
Si pllY. 

PSS) Ton 3070 a Saqqer, JE S4:11-13, ple NL 

o ftg70) ‘Preliminary report on the excavations at North Saqqara, 1968-9’, IEA 56:5 
Ips tiXX. 

Engelhueh, & (1934) ‘A foundation seene of he Second Dynasty’, IEA 20: 183-4. 

Eman, A. (I890) Die Mirehen dat Papyrus Wesear, J Elnleinong und Conmentar. 
Berlin: WSpemann. Kênigliche Muneen 2u Herin, Midheilungen aus den 
Orientalinckah Sannungen 

Erman, A. and Grapov, H. (ed) (1929) Wûrserhuclî der deguprlschen Sprache, Band 3, 
Leip 1C Hinrielt 

(ST) Warersach der degyprlschen Sprache, Band $, Leipzig: 1C Hinrichs. 


Firman, H.W. (1958) The kingship rials of Egypt in SH Hooke (od) Mr, Rirual, 
and Kingship. Ersayts on the Theory and Practica o, Kingshlp ln he Anclent Near East 
and in larael, 74-104. Oxford: Oxford University Press st the Clarendon Press 

Fairsenvis, W.A. (1971-2) ‘Preliminary report on the first wo seasons at Hierakonpolis, 
MARCEOT-21, 61-8 

(1991) *A revised view of the Ka'nr palette, JARCE 28:1-20, 

efieh Ober die Ausgrıbungen des DAL in Tell 


Faulkner, RO. (1962) 4 Conche Dictionary of Middle Egyptian, Oxford: Griffith 
Insite, 

(969) Tie Ancient Eeyptlan Pyramid Texts, Oxford: Oxford University Press 

Fith, CM snd Quibell, LE. (1935) Te Step Pyramld (2 volumes), Cairo: IFAO. 

Fischer, HG. (1958) *A Ingment of late Predynastic Egyptian telief from the easter 
Delta’, ribu Aslae 21:64-88. 

I961) An Egyptian royal stela of the Second Dynasty, Arrlhus Aslae 24: 45-56. 

(1962) The cull and nome of the goddess Bar’, ARCE 1:718. 

I961) ‘Varia Aegyptnca', JARCE 2:17-51, 

o {1968) Demdero ln the Third Millennium BC Down to the Thehan Duninatlon of 
Upper Expt. Locust Valley, NY: 1J.Augustia. 

TEY Notes on stieks and staves in ancient Egypt, Merwopolitan Museu Journal 
13532 

(1996) Kurla Nova, New Yok: The Metopalitan Museum of A. Egyptian Studies 
2 


Frankfort, H. (1941) The origin of monumental architecture in Egypt, Amerie Journal 
‘af Senile Languages and Lireratures (latet INES) 58:320 S8 

(I4) Kingship and he Gods, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Friedman, F.D. (1995) The underground relief panels of King Djoser at the Step Pyramid 
complex’, RCE 32:1-42. 

Friedman, R. (1992) The Early Dynastic and transitional pottery of Mendes: the 1990 
‘sesso, in ECM. van den Brink (ed) The Nile Delta ln Trunsion: dtir 
Millennium BC. 195-205. Tel Aviv: van den Brak. 

(1994) ‘Prvdyastic seilement ceramics of Upper Egypt: a comparative study of the 
ceramics of Hemamieh, Nagada, and Hierakospolis , unpublished doctoral esis 
University of Califomis at Berkeley 

(1996) The ceremonial centre at Hierakoapalis Locality HK2OA' in Spencer (e4) 
Aspects of Early Egypt, 16-35. London: British Museum Press. 


Gaballa, GA. and Kitchen, K A. (1969) The festival of Sakar’, Orlentalla 38: 1-76. 

Galassi, G. (1955) "Lae del pil antico Egito nel Museo di Torino’, Risto dell ulan 
Nazionale d Archeologia e Storia dl Arte New Series 4:5-94. 

Gardiner, AH. (193%) The Mansion of Life and the Mader of the King's Larges, JEA 
483 01 

(1944) ‘Honus the Bebdette', JE4 30:23-60. 

(1946) The instruction addrissed 1o Kagenmni and his brethren’, JEA 32: 71-4, pl 
xiv 

(1957) Eppilan Grammar (rd edition, revised), Oxford: Griffith Institute. 

lose) The personal name of King Serpent, JE 44:38 8. 

1950) The Royal Canon of Turin, Oxford: Ciriffith lostitute. 

l961) Egypr af the Pharaoh, Oxford: Oxford University Press at the Clarendon 
Press. 

Gardiner, AH, and Peel, TE. (1952) The lrserlprions of Sinal 1, 2nd edition, revised and 
‘augmented by 1Cemy , London: Egypt Explorution Society. 

SSS) The nseriptions af Suu, 1l, edited by 1 Cermy . London: Egypt Exploration 
Sociely. Memoir 45 

Garstang, . (1901) E1 Araboh, London: Quaritch. Egyptian Research Aceount Memoir 6. 

o (02) Mahima and Bé Khallif. London: Quaritch. Egyplian Research Aecount 
Memoir 7: 

I90) Tome of the Third Exyptlan Dynasty at Reqûqnah and Bét Khallûf 
Westminster. Archibald Constable and Co. 

{1907 "Excavations at Hierakoapolis, at Ena, and in Nubla', ASAE 8: 132-48, 

Gauthier, H, (1914) ‘Quatre fragments nouveaux de la pierre de Palenme au musée dia 
Caine’, CRAIBL 1014:4896. 

IS) Diclomnaire des Noms Givgruphigues Comenus Duns les Tertes 
Hlêroglypliigues, tome 2, Cairo: IFAO. 

ID Dilanmnare des Noms Giographigues Comemus Dans les Teves 
Hlêroglypliigues tome 6, Caine: IFAO. 

Giddy, LL (1987) Egypt Ouses. Bahariya, Dakhla, Farafiu and Kharga During 
"Pharaonic Times, Warminster: Aris and Phillips. 


(1996) ‘Digging diary 1995-1996, Egyptian Archeology 9:27-30. 

{1907a ‘Digging diary 1996, Egyprnan Archaeology 10-27-30. 

—{199TD) ‘Digging diy 1996-1997" Egoprian Archaeology 11-25-8. 

Giddy, LL. and Jefteys, D.G. (1991) ‘Memphis 1990’, IEA 77:1-6. 

Gite, B, and Kozlowski, 1K. (1994) Prehmauie Sefiement Near Armnant, Heidelberg: 
Heidelberger Orientveclag Studien zur Arehiologie und Geschiciie Altkgyptens 6. 

Given, R. (1974) ‘A second relief of Sekhemhet in Sinai’, #ASOR 216:17 20. 

(IDM) ‘Sop’, LAV: 1107-10. 

Godron, G. (1990) Eudes sur Horus Den et Quelques Problênes de Egypte 
‘Arehague. Geneva: Patrick Cramer. Cahiers d Orientalisme 19. 

Goedicke, H (19560) ‘King Hr f37; E4 42-503. 

(956b) The pharol NpSuii', Z5 81:14-15 

{1966 ‘Die Laufbahn des Mf ıı’, MDAIK 2121-71, 

—{19M4) ‘Sechemehe', L4 V: 776-1. 

Gahary, J. (1992) AMhenûien's Sedfesilval at Karnak, London and New York: Kegan 
Paul kntemational. Sudics in EgyptoloEY. 

Goneim, 2. (1957) Horus Sethem.thet The Uafinlhed Sip Pyramld, Cairo: IFAO. 

Gophns, R. (1976) ‘Egyptian immigration into southern Canaan during he First 
Dynasty? Tel A9 331-7. 

o foo0) “Te Early Bronze 1 setlement at ‘En Besor Oasis’, EJ 40: 

—{1992) ‘A Faience statuetie from ‘En Besof', Erelluruel 3:45-7. 

{1902D} “The contacts betwreen ‘En Besor Oasis, southern Canaan, and Egypt during 
he late Predynastie and the threshold of the First Drrasty; a further assessment, in 
ECM van den Beink (ed) The Mle Delta fa Tramlon 414-34 Milennhun BC. 38S 
94. Tel Aviv: van den Beink 

Gaplina, R. and Gazi, D, (1985) ‘The Fist Dynasty Egyptian residency at ‘En Besor', 
Tel Aus 129-16. 

Gordon, AA. and Schwabe, CW. (1995) ‘The Egyptian wascepter and its modem 
analogues: uses as symbols of divine power and authority, ARC 32: 185-96. 

Grlselolk, B. (194) ‘Notes Jepigraphie arehalque', ASAE 44279-302. 

Grimal, N. (1992) 4 History of nelet Eypt. trans 1. Shaw, Oxford: Blackwell. 

(O03) “Travaux de T'lnginut Francais dArchéologie Orientale en 1992-1093", 
BIFAOOSA2S S19. 

(1996) Travaux de Tnsitut Français dArchéologie Orientale en 1995-1096, 
BIFAO6AS9 617. 


Haarlem, WM.van (1995) ‘Temple deposits at Tell Torahim Awada preliminary 
‘repo, GM AR:AS-S2. 

f los6) “Temple deposits at Tell rahin Awad II-—an update’, CME 154: 31-4. 

Habchi, L. (1939) ‘A First Dynasty cemetery at Abydos’, ASAE 30767-74, 

Habachi, L. and Kaiser, W. (1985) “Els Friedhof der Masdikulhur bei es-SafT, MDAIK 
4145-6 

Hall, ES. (1986) Te Pharaoh Smiles His Enemies, Berlin: Bruno Hessling. MAS 4. 

Hansen, D.P. (1967) ‘The excavations at Tell el Rubs, JARCE 6:5-16. 


Hartung, U. (1994) ‘Bemeskungen zur Chronologie der Beziehungen Agyptens 2 
‘Sdkanaun tn spatpeidynastiseher Zeit’, MDAIK 50:107 13. 
Hassan, FA. (1988) "The Predynastic of Egypt, Journal of World Prehistory 2, 2: 135 


5 

95) ‘Eaypt in he prebistocy of northeast Afiica’, ia JMSusson (od) 
Ciiearions af the Ancient Near East, volume Il, 665-8. New York: Charles 
Seribner's Sons. 


Hassan, S. (1938) Excavations at Saqqara 1937-1938, ASAE 38:03-21. 

Havas, 2. (1994) *A fragmentary monument of Djose from Saqqars', JEA 80: 45-36. 

Hayes, WC. (1953) e Seapler of Egypt. Part I, New York: The Metropolitan Museum 
ofA 

Helek, W. (1952) ‘Die Herkunft des abydenisehen Osirisituals', Arehlv Orientilni 
2072-85 

IS) Umeruchongen at den Beumieuels des dpptschen alen Relches, 
Gilekstadt J1 Augustin Verlag Agyplologische Forschungen 18. 

(1970) ‘Zwei Einzelprobleme der thiniisehen Chronologie', MDAIK 26: 83-5. 

{1972 ‘Zu den “Talbezirken” in Abydos, MDAIK 2895 9. 

(1974) ‘Bemerkungen zuns Amalenstein', MDAIK 30.315, 

(1915) Wirsehafsgesehchte des alen Agypien ln 3. und 2 Jhrtausend vor Chr, 
Leidea/K bln. EJ ril. Handbuch der Orientalistik. 

f 1979) ‘Die Datierung der Gefilaufschrifen der Djoserpyramide', ZAS 106: 120- 
2 


oo) ‘lat, LA I: 114. 

{982 ‘Palermostein', LÎ IV: 652-4. 

—{I9Ma) ‘Sanakht', L4 V: 315 6. 

—{I9BHb) ‘Saqqara, Nekropolen der 1.-3. Dya’, LÎ V: 387-400. 

—{19Me) ‘Semed’, LV: RS. 

(Md) ‘Schamune und Zauberer', in Mélange Adolphe Gubub, 103-8. 
Moapellier: Instiut dEgyptologie, Universkê Paul Valéry Mompellier II. 
Publications de ls Recherehe 

Hendricks, S. (1992) The Predynastie cemeteries at Khozam’, in RFriedman and 
"B.Adans (als) The Followers of Horus Studies Dadlcated to Michael Allen Hofinan, 
199-201. Oxford: Oxbow. Monograph 20. Egyptian Studies Association Publication 
No.2. 

(1903) ‘Relative chronology of the Naqada culture’, unpublished paper delivered at 
he British Museum Colloquium on ‘Early Egypt, London, 22 July 1993. Manuscript 
ıo le with the author. 

fiona) EMub V. The Nagada Ill cemetem, Brussels: Muses Royaux d'Art et 
"Histoire, Coit des Fouilles Beiges en Egypte. 

Hendricios, S. and Huyge, D. (1989) Elta IV. Popographie. Faseicule 2: hmentalre des 
‘Sites Archtologigues, Brussels: Fondation Egyprologique Reine Elisabeth, 

Herrmann, G. (1968) Lapis zul: the carly phases of its rade’, Iraq 30-21-57. 

Hoffman, MA. (1976) The city of the hawk: seat of Egypt's ancient civilization’, 
Eepedilon T8, 33241. 

S80) Epp! Before he Pharaohs, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 


— (982) The Predınastie of Hleratonpolls—din leterin Report, Giza and Macomb, 
Minois: Cairo Universiey Herbarium and Western Hingis University. Egyptian Studies 
Association Publication No. 1 

(ISM) “Pretlyrastic cultural ecology and patterns of settlement in Upper Egypt as 
viewed Irom Hierakonpalis', in LKrzyzaniak and M Kobusievicz (eds) Origur and 
Early Developmen! of Food-Prodisclag Cullures in Nort Eastern Africa, 235 45. 
Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum, Sudies in Aftican Archncolozy 1 

RSET) ° regional perspecive of the Prediynastic cemeteries of Hierakonpolis' in 
BAdums, The Fort Cemetery at Hierakonpalis 1574. London: Kegan Paul 
Intemational. Studies in Egyptology. 

Hofman, M.A, Hamroush, HLA, and Allen, R.O. (1986) *A model of urban development 
“for the Hierikonpolis segion roe Predynastie through Old Kingdon times, LIRCE 
23175-87 

Holmes, D.L. and Friedman, RF. (1989) "The Badarî regioa revisited’, Npume Aluma 
3115-19 

Hêlscher, U. (1912) Das Grahdlenlnal des Kûnigs Chephren, Leipzig: 1C. Hinrichs. 

Hblseher, W. (1955) Lilyer wd Agypter. Belrûge sur Eilnalogle und Geschlehe 
Mnseher Volkerschafien nach den altigsprlschen Quelle, Gluekstadt: Verlag 11. 
Augustin, Agyptologische Forsehungen 4. 

Hope, C.A. (1980) ‘Dalihleh Ousis Project report on he study of the pottery and kilns’, 
ISSEA 10283-313. 

Homung, E. (1983) Conceptions af Gad ia Anclent Egypt. The One and the Many trans. 
"J Batses, London: Routlelge and Kegan Paul. 

Homung. E. and Staehelin, E. (1974) Sudlen sum Safest BuselGeneva: 
Agyplologisches Seminar der Universitit BaselCentre détudcs orientales de 
1 Uaiversltê de Geneve. Aegyptiaea Helvetica 1 

Houlihan, PF. (1986) The Bird of Ancien Egypt. Warminster: Aris and Phillips. 

Husson, i. and Valbelle, D. (1992) L Eur ef les Jnstinmions en Egypte: des Premiers 
"Phuraons aux Enperers Romans, Paris: Armand Colin. 

Huyge, D. (1984) ‘Horus Qua ia the Elkab area, Upper Egypt’, Orlemtalia Lovanlensla 
Periadiea 15:5-9. 


Jaequet-Gondon, H. (1962) Les Noms de Dunaines Finiralres sous I 4ncien Emplve, 
Cairo: FAO: 
James, TOH. (1974) Corpus of Hieroglyphe lnscriputons tn the Brooklyn Museum, 
"From Dynasty 11a Hie End of Dynasty XIII, Brooklyn, NY: The Brooklyn Museum. 
Janssen, J.J (1978) Te early state in ancient Egypt’ in HJM Claessen and P Salt 
(eds) Te Early Sole, 21334. The Hague: Mouloa. 

Jefîreys, D. and Tavares, A. (1904) The historic landscape of Early Dynastic Memphis’, 
ADAK SO:143-13 

Jêquier, G. (1911) Le Papyrus Prlase et Ses Variantes, Paris: Libeairie Paul Geuthner. 

Johnson, S.B. (1990) The Cobra Godless af Anclent Egypt Predynastlc, Early Dynasties 
and Old Kingulom Periods, London and New York: Kegan Paul Intemational. Studies 
in Ezyploloay 


Junker, H. (1912) Bericht aber die Grabuengen der kose! Akademie der Wusenschufes 
in Wien auf dem Friedhof in Turuh. Winer 1909-1910 Vienna: Aled Holler. 
Denksehrifhen der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wisseaschaften in Wien, Philosophiseh- 
Historische Klasse 56. 

(930) ‘Phen, ZS 75.63. 


Kahl, 1 (1994) Das System der dagprlschen Hlerogbphenschrif ln der û-3. Dymastle, 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowi. GÖtinger Orientforschungen. IV. Reihe Agypuen. Band 29. 
f, W. (1956) ‘Sund und Probleme der dgyptisehe Vorgeschichtsforsehung', ZAS 


1951) “Zur ineren Chronologie der Naqadakultur', 4rchueologla Gevgrophicu 
66-T. pls 15-26. 

{1958 ‘Zur vorgeschichtlichen Bedeutung von Hierakonpalis', MDAIK 16 
(Fessenritt Junker}: 1K92. 

(1950) 'Einige Bemeıkungen zur dgyptischen Flhzeit 1", ZAS 4:1 19-32. 

(1960) ‘Einige Bemerkungen zur ãgyptischen Flhzeic! (Forts ', ZAS 85: 118-37 

1961a) "Einige Bemerkungen 2ur faypisehen Frihzeit I1 

{961b ‘Rereht Uber eine arekiologiscl-geologisehe Felduntersuchungî, MDAIK 
I153 

(1964) ‘Einige Bemerkungen zur gy ptiseben Flhzeit 1I, ZÎ 91:36-12, 

1960) ‘Zu den königlichen Talbezirken der 1. und 2. Dyuastie ia Abydos und aur 
Buugeschichie des Djoser-Geabrmals', MDAIK 25:1-21 

I971) ‘Die Kleine Hebseddarstcllungen im Soanenheiligtum des Neuere’ 
Belge sur Agspilschen Bouforschung und Aerumskvnde 12 (Festschrift Rieke} 
10S 

(98S) “Ein Kultbezirk des Königs Den i Sakkara', MUDAIK 3961-87. 

—{IORSD) ‘Zu Entwicklung und Vorformen der Tilzeitichen Griber mit reich 
gegliedener Oberbaufussade', in Melnges Motiuor Il, 25-38. Cainm: IFAO. 
Bibliohêque d'Ewde 97. 

(1986) ‘Vor und Frihgesehiehte, Li VI: 1069-76. 

—{1987) ‘Zum Friedhof der Naqada-kultur von Mînshut Abu Omar’, ASAE 71:119 
26 


(1990) ‘Zur Entstehung der gesamtîgyptischen States’, MDAIK 46287-99. 

(1991) ‘Zur Nenmung von Sene und Feribsen in Sakar B3’, GMI122.49-55. 

—{1902) “Zur umterindischen Anlage der Djoserpyramide und ihrer entwiek 
lungsgeschichilicben ‘Einordnung', in Grammer Waller and W.Helek (eds) 
Gegengahe: Festschrft fur Emma Brunner Tra, 161-190. Tubingen: Anempto 
Verlag. 

Kaiser, W. and Dreyer, G, (1982] ‘Umm el-Qaah, Nachuumtersuchungen inn frlhzeitichen 
Kûnigsîiiedhof. 3. Vorbericht', MDAIK 34-211-69. 

f. Wand Grossmann, P. (1979) ‘Umm el-Qaah, Nachuntersuchungen im 
Muhzelichen Kûnigsîedhof. I. Vorbericht, MDAIK 35155-63, pls 31-2 
Kaiser, W., Avila, R, Dreyer, G., Jari, H, Rising, FEW. and Seidmayer, S. (1982) 

‘Sadr und Tempel von Elephaniine. 9/10. Geabungiberich", MDAIK 38271 AS. 


ka 


f. W Dreyer, G, Jari, HL, Krekeler, A, Lindemann, J. von Pilgrim C, 

‘Seidlmajer, $. and Zicrmann, ML. (1988) “Stadt und Tempel von Flephantine. 15/16: 
Grabungsbericht', MDAIK 4:135-82 

Kaiser, W., Becker, F., Bommmas, M, Hofimann, F., Jaritz, H., Mintel, S., Ptaniek, J.-P. 
and Ziemann, M. (1995) stadt und Tempel von ‘Elephantine. 2122 
Grabungsbericht', MDAIK 51:90-18. 

Kînel, F.von (1984) ‘Selqel', LA V: 830-3. 

Kantor, HJ. (1965) "The relative chronology of Egypt and its foeeign correlations before 
he late Bronze Age’, ia R.W.Ebrieh (edl) Cironologies bn Old World Archaeology: 1 
46 Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Kaplony, P. (195) ‘Sechs Kûnigsname der I. Dynastie in neuer Deutung', Onemalla 
‘Suecuna 7:5460. 

1962) ‘Goespalant und Gûterfestungen ia der feyptischen Frûhzei’, ZÎ RH:S- 
5 


96) Die Tascirifien der agopilschen Frise, (3 vols), Wiesbaden: 
Hamassowriz AA 

96) Die schrifien der gyptlsehen Frileelt, Supplement, Wiesbaden: 
Hamassowit AA 9 

I965) ‘Bemerkungen zu cinigen Steingefiben mit archaisehen Kûnigsnamen’, 
MDAIK 20:1-46. 

(1966) Kleine Belirige au den lnschrifien der dgypulschen Frihselt, Wiesbaden: 
Hamassowitz. AA 15 

(9T) ‘Hedjwer', LÊ 1l: 1078-0. 

{1986 ‘Zepter', LÎVE 1373-80. 

(1992) “Arehiikehe Siegel und Siegelabrollungen aus dern Delta: die Abel an den 
‘Siegela son Buta’, in ECM van den Brink {ed.Y Tie Nile Delta ln Transition: dih- 3rd 
Milena BC. 24-30. Tel Aviv: van den Brink. 

Katzman, L. (1990) ‘Tierkcnocheniunde aus Elephuntine in Oberîgypten (Grabungsjahre 
1916 bis 1986/87): Vogel, Repilien, Fische und Mollusken', unpublished doctoral 
thesis, University of Munich 

Kees, H. (1927) ‘Zum Urspeung der sogenannte Horusdiener', Nachrichuen von der 
"Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften lr Gotinen, Phllologisch-Hlisorische Klasse, aus 
dem Jahre 1927.196207. 

Kemp, B.J. (1966) ‘Abydos and the royal tombs of the First Dynasty, EA 5 

(I967) ‘The Egyptian Ist Dynasty royal cemetery, Ancigulty 41:22-32. 

(196) “The Ours temple at Abydos, MDAIK 38:138-35 

{I973 ‘Photographs of the decorated tomb st Hierıkoapolis', EA 59: 36-43. 

o {19T50) “Architektur der Frlhzeit, in C.Vandersleyen (e) Das alte Agypien, 99- 
112. Berlin: Propylêen Verlag. Propyiien Kunstgesehiehte 15, 

o TSD)*Abylos', LA 1: 28 41. 

—{197T) ‘The early development of tours in Egypt Anuiqulty 51:185-200. 

(1983) Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period, ¢. 2686 
1552 BC", ia B.G. Tigger, B1Kemp. D.O Connor, and AB Lloyd, Ancient Etypt: 4 
“Soelal Hitory, 1-182. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


و 


(1980) Ancient Egypt. Anatomy of a Civilteation, London and New York: Routledge. 

1905) “Unifienten and urbanization of ancient Egypt, in IM.Sasson (od) 
Cuiiearians af the Ancient Near East, volume Il, 679 90. New York: Charles 
Seibner's Sons. 

Kempinski, A. (1992) ‘Reflections on he role of the Egyptians in the Shefelah of 
"Pulesine in the ligbt of recent soundings at Tel Erni, in E.CM.van den Brink (ed) 
The Nile Dela r Trensleion: 40e 3rd Milenndam BC: 419-25. Tel Aviv: van den 
Brak 

Klasens, A. (1957) ‘The excavations of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities at Abu-Roash 
‘Report of the first senan: 1957. Part ', OMRO 38:58 68. 

SS) “The excavations of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities at Abu-Roash. Report 
of the sevond season: 1958. Part I", OMRO 39:32-55) 

(1950) "The excavations of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities at Abu-Roash. Report 
of the second season: 1958. Par II", OURO 4041-61. 

(1960) The exeavations of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities at Abu-Roash. Report 
ofthe third season 1950 Prt, OMRO 41:60-04. 

(1961) “The excavations of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities at Abu-Roash. Report 
of the third season 1950. Part 1L Cemetery MF. OMRO 42:108 28 

Klemm, R. and Klemm, D.D, (1994) “Chronologischer Abid der antiken Goldgewinnung 
in der Osrwûste Agyptens', MDAIK 50:189 222 

Kosfoed-Petersen, O. (1951) Egyprian Soupnre ln he Ny Carlsberg Ghpuothel 
‘Copenhagen: Biance Lunos Bogtiykkeri 

Kbhler, EC. (1992) “The Pre. and Early Dynastic pottery of Tell el-Fara'in (Buta), in 
ECMvan den Brink (ed) Fe Nile Dela 1n Transion: thc 3nd Milennium BC, IL 
22. Tel Aviv: van den Bein 

i993) "Tell el-Fara'in- Bulo: Die Keramik der Shichten I bis VI. Untersuchungen 
zur Tipfereiproduktion einer frihen Siedlung des Nildelkas', unpublished doctoral 
hesis, Univesity of Heidelberg. 

(1985) “The state of research on late Predynastie Egypt: new evidence for the 
development of the Pharsonic stale , GM 47:70-92. 

Koeper, K. (I98) ‘The excavations Of the Munich East-Delta Expedition in Minshat 
Abu Onur, in ECMvan den Brink (ed) The Archaeology af ihe Nile Dela: 
Problems and Proriies, 11-46. Amsterdam: ‘Netherlands Foundation for 
Archeological Research in Ezypt 

(1989) “Seulement in the Nile Delta to the end of the Old Kingdon’, unpublished 
doctoral thesis, Uniwersytet Warszawskî Wydrial Historeyezny. 

(1902) “Tombs of he elie in Minshat Abu Omar , in E.C.MLvan den Brink (ed) The 
Nile Delta hw Transiion: e-3" Milennlon BC. 137-50. Tel Aviv: van den Brink 
{1996 ‘Minshat Abu Omar burials with paleues', în Spencer (e4) Aspects of 

Early Egypt. 10-91. London: British Museum Press, 

Kıneper, K. and Wildung, D. (1985) Monshar Abu Omar. Minchner Oukdelta-Epedltion 
Tarborich 1978-1984, Munich: Stustliche Sammlung Agypiseher Kunst. Sehriftea 
sas der Agyplischen Sammon 3 

obe) Minshar Abt Omar. Ele vor und frihgesclnlehilieher Friedlhof in Nildela, 1, 
Mainz am Rhein: von Zabem. 


Kezyzniak, L (1992) ‘Again on the earliest setlement at Minshat Abu Omar’, in 
E CMEvan den Brink (ed) The Nile Delta n Trunsttlan: 4fh-3nd Millennium BC, 151 
5. Tel Aviv: van den Beink 

Kuhlman, K.P. (1996) ‘Serikstyle architecture and the design of the Archaic Egyptian 
palace (Kanigezel", in MBietak (ed) Haus und Palast bm alien Agypiew House 
nd Palace ur Anclent Eeypt, 117-37. Vienna: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften. Untersuchungen der Zweigstelle Kain des Osterreichischen 
Arehiologischen Institutes, Band XIV. 


Laeau, P. and Lauer, J.-P. (1950) La Pyrumldle û Degrés 1V. lrseriptlons Graves sur les 
Yases Cairo: IEAO. 

o 9ê5) La Pyrumide û Degrês V. lnseriprions û I Enere sur les Vases, Cairo: IFAO. 

Lambesg-Karlovsky, C.C. and Sablofl, LA, (1979) Ancien Chllzarlons: The Near East 
amd Mesoamerico, Menlo Park, California: Benjarnin Cummings Publishing Co. 

Lansing, A. (1935) “The Museum's excavation at Hierakonpolis', Supplement 10 the 
Bulletin of the Metropole Museen of Arr 30, 11:3745 

Lauer, 1-P. (1936) Fonlles ã Saqqoroh. La Pramide û Degrés 
Cairo. FAO. 

(1930) Foulles û Saqqaruh. La Pyramle û Degrés, IL. Conplênents, Cairo: IFAO. 

los) “Evolution de la tobe royale égyptienne jusqu'a la pyramide 4 degrts' 
MDAIK 15 (Festschrift Junker): 148-65. 

(1962) Hitoire Monumemale des Pyramides d' Egypte, 1.Les Pyramldes ã Denis 
(IF Dynasrie) Cairo: IFAO. Bibliothêque dEnude 39. 

(1966) ‘Quelques remarques sur la 1" Dynastic’, BIFAO 64:169-M4. 

{1968 ‘Dévouvere du tombeau sud de I'Horus Sekbemrkhet dans son conmplexe 
funêraire û Saqqarah', MME 2097-107. 

——{1960) *A propos des vestiges des murs û sedans encadrés par les “tombs of the 
euriers" et des farts" d Abydos, MDAIK 25:19-84. 

(976) Saggara. Te Royal Cemetery of Memphs. Ereavarions andl Discoveries 
"Smee 1850. London: Thames and Hudson. 

I98) "Sur certaines modifications et extensions apporttes au complexe funéeaire 
de Djoser au cours de son rêge’, in 1Baines, TCH James, A. Leahy and AF Shore 
(eds) Pram Snalies and Other Ears Presented to LE.S Eûvanls, 5-11. London: 
Egypt Exploration Society 

Leclant, J. (1952) ‘Fouilles et travaux en Egypte, 1950-1951, Part 2, Orlemtalla 21:233 
49. 

Leclant, J. and Clee, i. (1988) ‘Fouilles et travaux en Egypte ct au Soudan, 1986-1981 
Orientalta 57-30-404, pls VI-LXX 

—{1992) ‘Fouilles et travaux en Egypte et au Soudan, 1990-1991, Oriemtalla 61:214 
E 

—{1903) ‘Fouilles et rava en Egypte et au Soudan, 1991 
295 

—{1994) ‘Fouilles et rava en Egypte et au Soudan, 1992-1993, Orlemtalla 63345 
a 


I1 L ‘Architecture, 


992, Oentali G2:175- 


Legge, F. (1900) “The carved slates fiom Hieraconpolis and elsewhere’, RASRA 22: 125- 
0 

(1907) “The tablets of Negadalh and Abydos’, PSRA 29:18-24, 70-3, 101-6, 150-4, 
and plates, 

Legrain, G. (1903) ‘Notes dinspeetion’, ASAE 4:193-226. 

Lehner, M, and Lacovara, P. (1985) ‘An enigmatic object explained, EA T1: 169-74. 

Lesko, LH. (1988) ‘Sela 1981’, JARCE 25215-35. 

Levy, TE, Brisk, EC.M van den, Goren, Y. and Alon, D. (1905) "New light on King 
Narmer and the Protodynastic Egyptian presence in Canaan, Biblical Archaeologh! 
SEIS 3S. 

Lichihein, M, (1975) Ancient Eypuion Lueranwe. Volane I The Old and Midile 
‘Kingsloms, Berkeley, CA: University of Califomis Press. 

Sto) Ancient Egyptian Derave. Volume Ill: The Late Period. Berkeley: 
University of Califo Press. 

Lloyd, A.B. (I98) Herodons ook Il. Commentary 99-142. Leiden: EJ. Bri, Etudes 
‘Prdlirinaires aux Religions Orientales dans 1° Empire Romain. 

Logan, T1. (1990) ‘The origins of the yc fetish’, JARCE 27:619. 

Lucas, A. (1962) Anclen! Eqgptan Malenals and Inusrries, 4th edition, revised and 
‘enlarged by 1R Harris, London: Edwan Amol, 

Lurker, M. (1980) The Gods and Sunbols of Anclent Eypt. Au Hlustrated Dicrionary 
"London: Thames and Hudson. 


Mace, AC. (1909) The Early Dynastic Cemeteries of Nugucad-Dér, 11, Leipzig: 
TC Hinrichs. 

McEuea, RE. and Myers, OH. (1940) ‘Tuo sondages', in RMoad and OH-Myers, 
Temples of Armani text volume, London: Egypt Exploration Society. 

Macrmallah, R. (1940) Un Cimetêre Archaipue de la Classe Moyenne du Peuple û 
‘Saqqarah, Cairo: Imprimerie Nationale. 

Malek, 1. (1986) a he Shadow of the Pyramid. Egypt During the Old Kingdom 
‘London: Orbis 

Marîoe, L. (1987) ‘Cedar forest to silver mountain: social change and the development of 
‘Îoag-distance trade in carly Near Eastern societies’, in M Rowlands, MLarsen and 
KKristiansen (eds) Cemre and Periphery ln she Ancien World, 25-35. Cambridge: 
Cambcidge University Press. New Direelicas ia Archaeology. 

Marin, GT. (1979) The Tomb of Hetepka anl Other Reliefs and Inscriptions From the 
‘Sacred Animal Necropolis, North Sagqara 10641973 London: Egypt Exploration 
‘Society. Texts fiom excavatioas, fourth memoir. 

Manin, K. (1984) ‘Sedfest, LA V: T82 0. 

(lé) “Urîus', LA VI: B648. 

o {ISRED) ‘Was-Zepter', L4 VI: 1152-4. 

Marin-Pandey, E. (1976) Ummersuchngen =r digyptlsehen Provlrziahervaltung hls sume 
‘Ende des Allen Relehes, Hidesheian. Gerstenberg. HAB 1 

Maspero, MG. (1902) ‘Note sur les objets reeueillis sous la pyramide dJ'Ounas', ASAE 
iS s0. 


Massoulanl, E. (1940) Prêhlstolre er Prorohlatalre d'Egopte, Paris: Institut dEthnologie. 
‘Travaux et mémoires 53. 

Mathieson, LJ. and Tavares, A. (1993) ‘Preliminary report oa the National Museums of 
“Scotland Saqqara Survey Project, 1990-91, JEA 9:17-31. 

Melzer, ES. (1972) Hocus de “eutter,” “seveier (of heads)", INES 31338-9, 

MidantReynes, B, Buchez. N, Hesse, A. and Lechevalier, C. (1990) ‘Le site 
prêdynasique dAdalma. Rapport prtiminaire de la campagne de fouiles 1989", 
BIFAO OATS. 

Midant-Reynes, B, Buchez, N, Crabezy, E., Jani, T. und Hendriekt, S. (1992) ‘Le site 
prêdynasique J Adama: Rapport pedliminaire de la roisiême campagne de ouille, 
fool BIFAO 02:133 46. 

Midantkeynes, B, Crubezy, E, and Janin, T. (1996) ‘The Predynastic site of Adal’, 
Egyptian Archacology 9:13-15. 

Millet NB. (1990) ‘The Narmer macehead and related objects, JARCE 2753-9. 

Mills, AJ. (1980) ‘Dakhleh Oasis Project report on the second season of survey, 
‘Septenber-Decenber, 1979, JSSEA 10251-2. 

Mogensen, M. (1930) La Gijptotêgue Ny Curlsherg. La Collection Egupuieme. 
Copenhagen: Levin and Munksgaard. 

Milles, G. and Seharfl A. (I26) Die aveheologbchen Ergebnisse des 
voresehicklichen Griberfeldles von Ahuslr el-Meleq. Leipzig: IC. Hinen 

Mond, RL. and Myers, OH. (1937) Cemeieries of Arnant I, London: Eypt Exploration 
‘Sociey. 

(1940) Temples of Amant. 4 Preliminary Survey, London: Egypt Exploration 
Society. 

Monet, P. (1928) ‘Notes et documents pour servir û I'histoire des relations entre 
Tancienne Egypte et la Syrie, Il. Nouvelles traces des Egyptiens 4 Byblos’, Kût 
1893. 

{1938 “Tombeaux de la I™ et de lı 1V" dynasties û Abou-Roach', Kérn! 7: 11-69, 
pls 1XIv, 

(I946) ‘Tombeaux de la 1 et de la 1V" dynasties û Abou-Roach. Deuxiêne pantie: 
inventaire des objets’, Kemi 151-223, pls LXIV. 

Mootey, PRS. (1987) ‘On racking cull transfer in prehistory: the case of Egypt and 
lower Mesopotamia in the fourth millennium BC", in M. Rowlands, MLarsen and 
KKristiasen (eds) Cene and Periphery lı the Ancient World, 36 46. Cambridge: 
Cambeidge University Press. New Direetioas in Archaeology. 

Morgan Ide (1896) Recherches sur les Origine de VEgypie, 1. L Age de la Plerre et les 
Meran, Paris: Emest Leroux. 

ROT) Recherches sur les Origines de ‘Egypte, I. Ethnographic Prihlatorigue et 
Tambur Royale de Nepal, Paris: Ermest Leroux. 

Mortensen, B. (1991) ‘Change in the seulement parm and population in the beginning 
ofthe historical period, Azote und Levante 2:11-37. 

Mller, H. (1938) Die furmate Ennwickhug der Tiadanur der igıpulschen Kûnlge, 
Cilekstad J.1 Augustin, Agyplologische Forsehungen 7. 

Miller-Winkler, C. (1984) ‘Sehem-Ring', L4 V: 577 9 


Munro, P. (1993) ‘Report on the wock of he Joint Archaeological Mission Free 
‘Unversity Berliv Univesity of Hannover during heir 12% campaign (15th Mareh 
until 14th May, 1992) at Saqqara’, Discırsslons ln Eyptoloy 26:4758. 

Mumane, WIL (I987) “The Gebel Sheikh Suleiman monumene epigraphic reamack 
INES 6282-5. 

Murray, GW. (1939) ‘Aa Arehaie hut in Wadî Ura Sidrah', JEA 25:38-9, pls 

Murray, MA. (1904) The Orlrelon ar Ahyrdas, London: Quanieh 


x. 


Nesdier, W. (1956) ‘A int knife of King Djer', JEA 4241-4, 

(S67) 'A rockdraving on Gebel Sheds Suliman (near Wadi Hall) shoving a 
scorpion and humwn gues’, HARCE G:ET-92. 

ODM) Praimastie and Archaic ppt in the Brooklyn Museum, Brooklyn: 
Brooklyn Museum. 

Newbery, PE (1909) ‘Impressions of seals from Abydos’, Anal of Archaeology anal 
Airopology 2:130, pls XXIEXXV. 


O'Brien, A, (1996) The serekl as an aspect of the iconography of ently kingship’, 
SAREE S3123 38. 

O'Comor, D. (1972) *A regional population in Egypt to cia 600 BC’, in B.Spooner 
(e4) Fupularion Grom: Anthrnpologleal Inpcanians. 78-100. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press 

—IRTThe earliest pharaohs and the Univesity Museum Old and new 
excavations: 1900-1987", Espeditlon 29, 1-27-39, 

(I80) "New funerary enclosures (Folhezirke) of the Early Dynastic Period’, HARCE 
2651-86. 

(1990) Unpublished, untitled projcet proposal for excavation of the carly settlement 
wat North Abydos. Manuscript oa le with the author (courtesy of B.J Kemp), 

{IDI ‘Boar graves and pyramid origins New discoveries at Abydos, Eeyp', 
Dpediion 33, 3:5-1 

(ISD?) "The status of early Egyptian temples: an alternative theory’, in RL Friedman 
and B.Adams (eds) The Followers of Horus. Sudies Dedicated to Michael Aller 
Hofinan. R498. Oxford: Oxbow. Monograph 20. Egyptian Studies Association 
Publication No. 2. 

(1993) Ancient Nubia: Egypt's Rival ln Africa, Philadelphia: University Museum, 
University of Pennsyivania. 

(995) The earliest royal boat graves', Egyptian Archueology 63-7. 

O'Mara, P.P. (1979) The Palermo Stone al the Archaic Kings of Expt. La Canada, CA: 
Paulcte. Studies in the structural archaeology of ancient EYP 

{1996 “Was there an Old Kingdom historiography? ls it datable!", Orientalla 
197 208. 

Ore, ED. and Gilead, 
i. 


(1981) ‘Chaleolithic sites in northwestern Sinai’, Tel 4l &25- 


Ore, ED. and Yekutieli, ¥. (1992) “Taur Ikhbenieh earliest evidence for Egyptian 
‘îmtercoanections', in ECM. van den Brak (ed) The Nile Delta i Trunstion: #th-3n 
Millenium HC, 361-34. Tel Aviv: van den Brink. 

Ono, E (1975) ‘Rdhedeli', LA 1: 68 


Patch, D.C. (1991) The origin and early development of urbanism in ancient Egypt: 4 
regional snudy, unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Pemmsylvania. 

Paye, JC. (1968) ‘Lapis hzulî in early Egypt’, rag 30:58-61. 

(I973) ‘Tomb 100. The decoeated tomb at HHierakonpolis confirmed’, IEA 50-31-5. 

(1993) Catalogue of the Prelynastic Egyptian Collection in the Ashmolean Mateo, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press 

Petrie, WMLF. (1892) Meuhem, London: David Nutt 

(I896) Kopo, London: Quaritch 

900) Royal Tombs of he First Dynasty, 1, London: Egypt Exploration Fund. 


Memoir 18. 

(SOI) Royal Toms of the Rorllest Dynasties, I, Londen: Egypt Exploration Fund. 
Memoir 21 

o 902) Aula, 1 London: Ezypt Exploration Fund. Memoir 22. 


(1903) Abnlas, Ik, London: Egypt Exploration Fund. Memoir 23, 

(1907) Gee and Rife, London: School of Archaeology in EgypU Quaritch 

(1909) Memphis, IL The Palace of Apries, London: Seheol of Archeology in 
FaypiQuarich, 

SIO) Meidum and Memphls, Il, London: School of Archaeology in 
FaypiQuarich. 

(1914) Terhan, Il, London: School of Archaeology in EgypQuaritch 

ons) Tombs of the Courlers and Oorhyihos. Landon: British School of 
Archaeology in Een. 

(I930) Te Mak of Egypt, London: The Sheldon Press. 

(9s) Ceremomal Slave Puletes, Corpus of Proto-Dynastle Potery, London: 
Biitich School of Egyptinn Archueoloay. 

Petrie, WMLF. and Quibel, 1E. (1896) Nagata and Ballas, London: Quaritch, 

Peri, WMLF, Wainwright, GA, and Gardiner, AH. (1913) Tarkhon, 1 and Memphis, 
V, London: School of Archaeology in Egy puQuaritch, 

Pinch, G.(1993) Fore Oferlngs to Hathor. Osten Giri Institute. 

Porat, N. (1902) ‘An Egyptian colony in southern Palestine during the late Predynastie- 
Early Dynastic period, in E.CNM.van den Brink (ed) The Nile Delta bn Transiion: 
hdr Millennium BC. 433-40. Tel Aviv: van den Brink. 

Porter, B, and Moss, RL B, (1937) Topographical Bibliography of Ancient Rxyptlan 
Heroghplhle Texta, Reliefs, and Palnsings, V. Upper Egypt: Stes, Oxfoed: Oxford 
University Press at the Clarendon Press. 

(951) Topogruphical Bibllogroply of Ancient Etyptlan Hieroglyphic Text, Relief 
and Palntinks VIL Nubia. the Deserts and Outils Egypt. Oxir: Oxford University 
Press at he Clarendon Press. 


(1974) Topographical Bibllograply of Ancient Etyptlan Hieroglyphic Tet, Rellef 
and Palins, Il. Memphis, 2ad cdion revised and augmented by XMdlck, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press at the Clarendon Press. 

Posener, G. (1965) "Brtves communications, RAE 17:193-5. 

Postale, N, Wang, T. and Wilkinson, T. (1995) “The evidence for early writing: 
‘witar or cerefnonial?, Antlgudly 69459-80. 

Prag, K. (1978) ‘Silver in the Levant in the fourth millennium BC", in RMooeey and 
PParr (ods) Archaeology i Me Levant Essays Jor Kallen Kenyon. 36 45 
Warminster: Aris and Phillips 

(986) ‘Byblos and Egypt in the fourth millennium BC", Levan 18:59-74. 

Pitehard, LB. (e4) (1969) Anclent Near Eastern Texts Relating 10 the Ol Testament, 
“3rd edition with supplement, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 


Quîbell, LE. (18984) ‘Slate palette froma Hierscoapolis', ZS 36-81-4, 

— (IPEb) E1 Kab, London: Quaritch. 

(1900) Hlerukonpolis, 1, London: Quuriteh. 

904-5) Catalogue Ginérul des Aniquitês Egypulemnes diu Musée dv Cuire. Nos 
11001-12000 ar 14001-14754. Archaic Objects, 2 volumes, Cairo: IFA. 

(1913) Ercavotlons ar Saqgara (1911-1912). The Tomb of Hey Cairo: IFAO. 

(923) Excavations at Sagara (1912-1914). Arehale Mastabus, Cairo: IFAO, 

Quibell, E. and Green, FW. (1902) Ileratonpolir I1, London: Quarich. 

Quike, S. (I990) Who Were he Pharaohs 4 History of Tele Names With a List of 
'Cariouches, Landon: British Museu Press. 

(SDD) Ancien Egyptian Religion, London: British Museum Press. 

Quirke, S, and Spencer, J. (eds) (1992) The Bra Museen Book of Ancient Etypt. 
London: British Museum Press. 


Randall-Maclver, D. and Mace, A.C. (1902) A Anu and Ahyulas, 1809-1901, London: 
Egypt Exploration Fund. 

Ray, LD. (1993) “The Pharaohs and heir eourt', n Malek (e) Egypt Anclent Culuwe, 
Mader Land, 60-T. Sydney: Weldon Russell Cradles of Civilization. 

Redford, D.B. (1986) King- List, Annals and Doy- Books. A Contribution to the Study af 
he Egyptian Sense of History, Mississauga, Ontario: Benben Publications. Society r 
he Suûy of Egyptian Antiquities Publication 4. 

Reeves, N. (1990) The Conplee Turanthamun. The King, the Tanh, the Royal Tease, 
London: Thames and Hudson. 

Reimer, GA. (1908) Tie Earl Dinale Cemeteries of NagaedDêr, 1, Leipaig: 
TC Hineiels. 

9BI) Mpeerinus, The Temples of the Third Pyramid at Gteu, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Univecaity Press. 

Renfev, AC. and Bahn, P. (1991) Archaeology: Theories, Methadi, ond Practice, 
London: Thames and Hudson. 

Ricci, S. (1917) ‘La table de Palerme', CRAJBL 1917:107-15. 


Rice, M. (1990) Egypt is Making. The Ortglns of Anclent Egypt 5000-2000 BC, London: 
Ruutlelse. 

Rimer, RK. (1903) he Mechanisms of Anclent Eeyprion Magical Practice, Chicago: 
‘The Oriental Insite of the Univenity of Chicago. Studies in Ancient Oriental 
Civilization 34. 

Rizkana, 1. and Secher, J. (1980) Madi IIL The Non-Lithie Small Finds and the 
‘Srucural Remalns of ihe Prafynasnic Setilenent, Mainz ama Rhein: von Zabern. 
AVDAIK s0. 

(1990) Maui IV. The Predynasilc Cemeteries of Maadi andl Wadi Digla, Mainz anı 
Rhein: von Zabe. AVDAIK S1 

Rath, AM. (1991) Eqyprlan Pyles ia the OM Krgdom. The Evolution of a Stem af 
‘Saelal Organi, Chicago: The Oriental Insitute of the University of Chicago. 
‘Studies in Ancient Oriental Civiliztion 48. 

1991) ‘Social change in the Fourth Dynasty: the spatial organization of pyramids, 
toh, and cemeteries’, JARCE 3033-55. 

f95) “Buried pyrainids: symbolic shapes and spaces in Old Kingdon mortuary 
architecture’, in CEyre (oL) Seventh International Congress of Etyptologisns 
Cambridge, 3-9 September 1805. Aburacs of Papers, 154-5. Oxford Oxbow or 
Intemational Association of Egyptologists, 

Rowlands, ME, Larsen, M. and Kristiansen, K. (eds) (1987) Centre andl Periphery in the 
Ancien World. Cambcidge: Cambridge Univenity Press, New Direction in 
Archaeology. 


Saad, ZY. (1947) Royal Ereavalons ar Saqqara and Helan (1941-1045), Cairo: IFAO. 
"Supplement aux Annales du Service des Antiquits de Egypte, Cahier 3. 

OSI Raya Etcavarions u1 Helan. Cairo: IFAO. Supplement aux Annales dla 
"Service des Antiquitts de Egypte, Cahier 14 

(I957) Calling Sielae in Second Dynasty Tomke fiom the Excavations at Hewan 
Cairo: IFAO. Supplement sux Annales du Service des Antiquités de Egypte, Cahier 
2 

(l969) The Ercmnatlons at Hehvan: Art and Cidlkzation ln he Flrst and Second 
Eyprlan Dynasties, Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Sayee, AH. (1898) “The beginnings of Egyptian monarchy, PSRA 20:96-101 

Sayee, AH. and Clarke, ES. (1905) ‘Report on certain excavations made at EFKab 
"during the years 1901, 1902, 1903, 1904, ASAE 6-239-72. 

Sayed, A. el- (1979) °A prehistoric cemetery in the Abydos area’, ADAK 35: 249-301. 

Selifer, H. (1902) Eln Bruchuticek alrûgıptcher Annalen, Berlin: Verlag der Königliche 
"Akademie der Wissensehaflen. 

‘Sehlêal, H. (e) (1978) Le Don di MIL Art Egypilen dans les Collections Sulses, Basel 
"Socilıé de Banque Suisse. 

Schmidt, K. (1992) ‘Tell el-Fara'in'Buto and ELTell el-lwid (South): the lithic 
indusiries fom the Chaleolithic to the carly Old Kingdon, ia ECM van den Brak 
(e4) The Nile Delta br Transition: 4tl 3rd Milennbom BC, 31-41. Tel Aviv: ven den 
Brink 

Sehit, B. (1984) ‘Sem(prieste)', LA V: 833-6, 


Schott, E (1969) ‘Die Sockelinsehrilt des Narmeraffen, RAE 21:77-83. 
‘Schott S. (1956) ‘Zur Krûnungstitulatur der Pyramidenzea’, Nachrichten der Akademie 
der Wuusensehufien in Gitingen, Philologlsch-Hiorische Klasse, aus dem Joire 


ED 

"Sella, A.K (1980) ‘More seal iompressions from ‘En Besar’, Ariqor (English series) 
ZS 

(1983) “On the dating of Egyptian seal impressions from ‘En Besor', JSSEA 13, 
Erz 


(198E) Ceremonial Exeeution and Public Rewards. Some Historical Seenes on New 
Kinglom Privaue Stele. FreiburgGOningen: Universitlsverlag! Vandenhoeck and 
Ruprecht Orbis Biblieus et Orientalis 15 

‘Seidlmayer, SJ. (1988) :Funerirer Aufwand und soziale Ungleichheit: eine methodisehe 
"Aamerkung eum Problen der Rekonstnuktion der geszllschafilichen Glisdenng us 
Friedholsfunden, GU 104-25-5 

(1996) ‘Die sautliche Anlage der 3. Dyn, in der Nordveststadt von Elephantine. 
Atelkiologische und historisehe Probleme. in MBictak (ed) Haus und Palast im 
alen AgyptenHouse and Palace ha Anclenr Egypt 195-214. Vienna: Verlag der 
Ostermeichisehen Akademie der WissenschaRen. Denikschrifen der Gesamtakademie. 
Untersuchungen der Zveigstelle Kai des Osterreichischen Archîologischeh 
Instiutes, Bund XIV. 

—{1996b) “Tow and state in the carly Old Kingdom, A. vie fiom Elephantine', in 
Spencer (e) Aqpects 2f Karly Egypi, 108-27, pls 22-3. London: British Museum 
Press 

Seligmın, C.C. and Murray, M|A. (1911) Note upon an early Egyptian standard, Mus 
16-71. 

"Serpico, M. and White, R. (1996) ‘A repart on the analysis of the contents of a cache of 
jars rom he tomb of Djer', in LSpencer (ek) Apec of Early Egypt 128-30. 
Tendon: British Museum Press. 

Service, ER (1915) Origins af he Site and Chl 
Evolution, New York afd London: WW Noon 
"Selhe, K. (1903) Ulavnden de alten Reichs, 1, Leipzig: 1.C.Hiariehs, 
(I906) Urkunder der 18 Donasle. Il. Hiluornchcblogruphische Urtunden aus der 

Zelı der Kûnige Thudmasis” 1nd 11, Leipzig: 1C Hinrichs. 

(914) ‘Hitherto unnoticed evidence fegarding copper works of art of the oldest 
period of Egyptian history’. JEA 1:2336. 

Sejitiel, KJ. (1984) Sandal’, L4 V: 379-82. 

Shaw, I. and Nicholson, P. (1995) The Aritsh Museum Dietlonary of Ancient Eypt. 
Landon: British Museum Press. 

Simpson, W.K. (1956) -A stamete of King Nincter', JA 4245-9. 

RISTA nunning of the Apis n tne feign of Aha’. Orenalia 26: 139-42. 

Sler, R. (1974) ‘The archaeology of Dendereh in the First Intermediate Period, 
‘unpublished doctoral thesis, Univesity of Pennsylvania. 

Smith, HS. (1971) ‘Waher Bryan Emery (obiruary, JE 37-190-201, 

(I972) ‘The rock inseriptions of Buhen', JE S4382. 

—{1992) ‘The making oF Egype a review of the influence of Susa and Sumer on 
Upper Egypt and Lower Nubia in fhe 4th millennium BC", in R.Friedman and 


sıion: The Process of Culnral 


B.Adams (ads) The Folloners of Honus Saudles Dadicated 10 Michael Allen Hofinan. 
235 46. Oxford: Oxbow. Monograph 20. Egyptian Studies Association Publication 
No.2. 

Smith, WS, (1949) 4 History af Egyptian Seulpnure andl Palnting lı ahe OU Klngulom. 
London: Oxford University Press (for the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston). 

9T1) “The Old Kingdom in Egypt and the begianing of the Firsî terme 
Period’. in LES.Edvards, C1Gadd and NGL-Hammond (ods) The Cambridge 
dAnelen History. 3nd edition, Volume 1 Part 2 (Early history of the Middle Eas), 145 
207. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

(IRI) Te Art amd Archneewre of Ancient Egypt. 2nd revised edition with additions 
by WK Simpson, New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press. Pelican 
History of Ar 

"Spencer, AJ. (1978) ‘Tuo enigmatic hieroglyphs and their relation to the Sed-Festival', 
EASES 

(1980) Catalogue of Etyprlan Antlqulttes in the Brith Museum, V. Early Dynastic 
Oljecıs, London: British Museum Publications. 

(1993) Early Rpt: The Rise of Ciulisation i the Nile Valley, London: British 
Museum Press. 

"Spencer, A.J (e4) (1996) A4pects of Karly Eypt. London: Betis Museum Press. 

Sladelmann, RL. (1983) “Dus vermeintliehe Somenbeiligum im Norden des 
Dioserbezirkes', ASAE 69:373-8 

(IM) ‘Saujel el-Arjan', LA IV: 495-7. 

—{1985) ‘Dic Oberbauten der Kûnigsprîber der 2. Dynastic in Sakkara', in Mélonges 
Matar 11. 205307 Cairo: 1FAO. Biblioseque d'Eude 91. 

(1987) ‘Kêniginnengrab und Pyramideabezirke im alten Reich’, ASAE 71: 251-60. 

Stuehelin, E, (1984) ‘Omar, LV: 13-18. 

Struduick, N. (1985) Tie Adminstration of Egypt br the Ol Kingdom. The Highest 
Tiles and Their Holders London: Kegan Paul Tatematioaal. Studies in Egyploloey. 
"Selim, N (1988) “The dry moat of the Netjeryklhet complex’ in Baines, T.-H ames, 
"ALeahy and AF Shore (eds) Pyramid Suulies and Oiher Essays Presented 15 

LES Ednan, 12-22. London: Egypt Exploration Society. 

OSI) "Some remarks on the great rectangular monuments of Middle Saqqara" , 

MDAIK 4T (Festsehrift Kaiser}: 389_402. 


Takamiya, 1 (1994) ‘Egyptian pottery in A-Group cemeteries, Nubia: towards an 
understanding of pottery peoduction and distribution in predynastic and early dynastic 
Eaypt, unpublished ML Phil, thesis, University of Cambridge. 

Tavares, ‘A. (1995) “The National Museum of Scotland Saqqars Survey Project’ 
unpublished paper delivered at the Seventh Itemational Congress of Egyptologists 
Cambeidge, Septenber 1995. 

"Tessier, B. (1987) “Glyplic evidence for a connection between Iran, Syro-Palestine and 
Egypt in the fourth anıl thid millennia, Jun 25-27-53. 

Tigger, BG, (1972) ‘Determinants of urben growth in pre-industrial societies, in 
FP Ucko, R.Tringham and CW. Dimbleby (els) Man, Selement and Urhanksm, S15 
99. London: Duckworth. 


(1984) “The mainlines of socio-economic development in dynastic Egypt to the end 
of the Old Kingdom’, in LKezyzaniak anû MKobusiewiez (eds) Origin anî Early 
Development of Food.Producing Culnwes in North-Eastern Africa, 101-48. Poznan: 
Poznan Afehaeologieal Museu. Studies in Afiican Acchseoloy 2 

—{1985) “The evolution of pre-industrial cities: a mulilinear perspextive', in F. Geus 
and FETHI (eds) Melanges Ofer û Jean Vercouier. 343 S3. Paris: Editions 
Recherche sue les Civilisations. 

Tigger, EG. Kemp, BJ. O Connor, D. and Lloyd, A.B. (1983) Ancient Egypt 4 Social 
“Histon; Cumbcidge: Cambridge Uoiversity Press, 

Troy, L. (I86) Parterns of Oueenship in Ancient Egyptian Myth and Hir, Uppsala: 
University of Uppsala. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, Boreas. Uppsala Studies in 
Ancient Mediterranean and Near Easter Civilizations 14. 


Vandersleyen, C. (1971) ‘Les fouilles beiges @EIkab (Haute Egypte)", Ree des 
Archéologves et Histories d'4 de Lona 4:25-38. 

Vadier, J. (1968) “Une stêle égyplienne portant un nouveau nom royal de la troisitme 
mastic’, CRAIBL 1968:1622 

Velde, H. te (1967) Ser, God af Confuslon, Leiden: E.1 Bill 

Verhoeven, U, (1984) Gillen. kochen, hacen in Allag und iı Rinual Alûgyptens. El 
lerttograpischer Belrag, Brussels: Fondation Egypiologique Reine Elisabeth. Rites 
Eypiens IV. 

Vermerseh, PN. (1970) ‘Fikab 1966-1969. Le secteur archalque', CUE 45: 32-4. 

Vignes, A. (e4) (1935) Encyclopédie Photogruphipue de Art: Les Angus 
‘Epypilennes du hrs du Lounwe, Nol. 1, no. 1, Paris: Tel 


Wainwright, C.A. (1941) ‘Seshat and the pharaoh, JE4A 2630-40. 

Walle, Bvan de (1954) ‘Empreintes de seeaux archaiques', in Foulles de E! Kab 
‘Documenis, Livraison Hl, 91-8. Brussels: Fondation Egyplologique Reine Elisabeth, 
Pare du Cinquantenaire. 

Waller, 1. (1962) Die Palnen ln alien Îgypien, Bertin: Bruno Hessling, MÃS 1 

Warburton, D.A, (1997) Stare and Ecomony bı Ancient Egypt Fiscal Vocabulary of he 
New Kingdon. Fribourg Goningen: Uaiversity Press Fribourg! Vandenhocek and 
Ruprecht Ocbis Bîblicus et Orientalis 151. 

Ward, W.A. (1969) The supposed Asiatic campaign of Numer’, Milunges de 
"Université SalnJaseph A5:205-21 

— {1991) “Early contacls beween Egypt, Canan, and Sinai: remarks oa the paper by 
Amnon Ben-Tor', RASOR 281-11-26. 

Way, Tvon der (1984) "Untersuchungen des Deutschen Arehkologischen lastituts Kain 
in nordlichea Delta 2wischen Disûq und Tida', UDAIK 40:297 328, pls 379. 

SRE) ‘Tell eLFarrin “Bute. 1. Bericht’, MDAIK 42.191212. 

—{198T) ‘Tell eLFara in Bulo. 2. Berich’, MDAIK 43.24157. 

{98S ‘Tell eLFarsin Bulo. 3. Bericht’, MIDAIK 4:283-306 

—{1980) ‘Tell eLFars in Buto. 4. Bericht’, MDAIK 45.275-307. 


— (1991) ‘Die Grabungen in Buto und die Reichseinigung', MDAIK 47 (Festschrilt 
Kise 419-24. 

(1992) “Excavations at Tell el-Fara in Buta in 1987-1989, in E.C.M.van den Beink 
(e4) The Nile Dele 1a Tronslsion: thar Millennium 8C, 1-10. Tel Aviv: van den 
Brink 

I) Umeruchungen aw Spur und Frihgeschiche Unterigyplens 
Heidelberg: Heidelberger Orieniverlag. Studien zur Archdologie und Geschichte 
Alllaypiens 

(1996) “Early Dyaastic architecture at Tell el-Fara'in-Buto', in ML Bictak (ed) Haut 
und Palast im ahe Atuplen/fiouse and Palice ln Anclent Egypt. 247-52. Vienna: 
Verlag der Ouerreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Deakschriftea der 
Gesamtakademie. Untersuchungen der Zweigstelle Kairo des Ouerreichischen 
Areliiologisehen lnstinutes, Band XIV. 

Way, T.von der and Schmidt, K. (1985) “Berieht aber den Fortgang der Uatersuchungen 
iı Raum Tell e-Farı'in/ But, MDAIK 41269-91 

Weeks, KR. (1971-2) ‘Preliminary report on the firs two seasons at Hierkonpolis. P4 

the Early Dynastic palace? , LARCE 9.29-33. 

Weill, R. (1908) Les Orlgines de Egypte Pharsanlque, 1" Purtle: La Ie eı la lle 
"Dinastles, Paris: Emest Leroux. 

SII 12) "Monuments nouvenux des prenitres dynasties, Shier 15:1-35. 

(1961) Recherches ser la F” Dymastle e1 les Temps Prépkaruoniques, Cairo: IFAO. 
Bibliothéque d'Etude 34. 

Weinstein, JM. (1984) "The sîgnifieance of Tell Areini for Egyptin-Palestinin relations 
‘atthe beginning ofthe Bronze Age". HASOR 256:63. 

Wenke, RL (1989) ‘Egypte origins of complex societies’, 
“Aruiropology 18:129-55. 

(1991) "The evolution of early Egyptian civilization: issues and evidence’, Journal 
af World Prehtory 5, 3279-329. 

Wenke, RJ. and Brewer, D.J. (1996) ‘The Arehuic-Old Kingdom Delt: the evidence 
fiom Mendes and Kom ELHisa’, in MLBietak (ed) Haus und Palast in alien 
dApypienouse und Palace in ‘Ancien Epp, 365-85, Viana: Verlag der 
Ostarmcichisehen Akademie dec Wissenschaften. Denkschrifien der Ciesamtakudermie. 
Untersuchungen der Zweigsiele Kairo des Oterreichischen Arehfologisehen 
Instiutes, Band XIV. 

Westendorf, W. (1966) ‘Beltrge aus und zu den medizinisehen Texten, 1. Mafdet, die 
Herrin des Lebenshuses, und Set, gı an Lebenskraf, Z45 92:128 41. 

Whitehouse, H. (1987) “King Den in Oxford’, Ord Journal of Archaeology 6: 257-61. 

Wîldung, D: (19694) ‘Zur Deukung der Pyranmide von Medun', RAE 21:135 45. 

—{1969b) Die Rolle dgyprlscher Kinige in Bewufiseln ihrer Nachwelt 1, Berin: 
Brno Hessling. MAS 17 

(SED) Apple vor den Pyramlden. Minchner Ausgrahungen bı Axypten, Mainz ani 
Rhein: von Zabe. 

Wilkinson, TAH. (19934) ‘Egypt in transition: Predynastie-Early Dyoastic chronology 
land he efîels of stute formation’, unpublished doctoral thesis, University of 
Cambeidge. 


Annual Review of 


—{1993b) “Te identifcation of Tomb BI a Abydos: refuting the existence of a king 
Ror*lcy-Hor', ZEA 241-3. 

{1905 *A new King în the wesle desert’, EA 81:205-10. 

lesen) "A swexaminstion of the Erly Dynastic aceropolis at Helwan 
S2337584 

(996b) State Formation in Egypt: Chronology andl Soclely, Oxford: Tempus 
Reparatum. BAR loterntional Series 651. Cambridge Monographs in Affican 
Archaeology 40. 

Willems, H. (1990) ‘Crime, cult and capital punishment (Mo'alla iaserîptioa 8)’, IEA 
e54 

Williams, B.B. (1986) Ercavarons Benwee Abu Slrihel and the Suclun Frontier. The 4 
Group Royal Cemetery af Oust. Cenetery L. Chicago: The Oriental laste of he 
University of Chicago. Oriental Insikure Nubian Expedition 1L 

IOS) "Forebeacs of Menes 1n Nubia: myth or reality” INES 46:15-26. 

{ORE *Narmer and the Coptos colossî', JARCE 25:35-50. 

Wiliams, BB. and Logan, TJ, (1987) -The Metropolitan Museum kaife handle and 
‘aspects of pharaonic imagery before Nanmer', NES 46:253-80. 

Wîlasa, A. (1955) "Bute and Hierakoapolis in he geography of Egypl', INES 14209- 
5 

960) “Egypt through he New Kingdom, Civilization without cities’, in 
CH.Kraeling and RM.Adams (eds) Ci lvincihle, 124-64. Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press. 

Winkler, HLA (1938) Roct-Dranings of Southern Upper Egypt, 1, London: Egypt 
Exploration Society. 

Winter, E. (1994) ‘Wer steht hinter Name’, ia M.Bietak, J Holaubek, HMukarovsky 
‘and H Satzinger (es) Zwtsehen den helen Ewtgtelten. Festschrift Goren Thaus\tg, 
279-90. Vienna: Eigenverlag des Instirutes fur Agypılogie der Universit Wien. 

Wimlogel, K. (1957) Ortemal Desporam. 4A Camparuthe Shah of Total Power. New 
Haven: Yale University Press Wood, W. (I978) -A reconstruction of the seliefs of 
Hesy-Re’, RCE 159 4. 

1987) “The Aechuic stone tombs at Helwan, JEA 73:50-70. 

Wright, H.T. and Johnsoa, G. (1975) ‘Population, exchange and early state focmatioa in 
‘southwestern Iran’, Anerlcon Anhropologlst 77.267-39 

Wunderlich, J (1988) ‘lavesigstions on he development of the western Nile Delta in 
Holocene times’, in EC.Mvan den Rink (ed) Te Archaeology of the Nile Del: 
Pobloms and” Pores, 251-7 Amsterdam: ‘Netherlands Foundation for 
Archeological Research in Egypt 


DAK 


Yadîn, Y. (1985) The earliest recon of Egypt's military penetration into Asia, EJ 
5:1-16 


Zarin, J. (1989) ‘Ancient Egypt and the Red Sea trade: the ease for obsidian in the 
Preûynastic and Archaic periods’, in A Leonard and BB. Wiliams (eds) Eisays 


Biniognphy 155 


Anclent Cvltzarlon Presented to Helene J Kumor, 330-68. Chicago: The Oriental 
nstiuute of he University of Chicago. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 47. 

(1990) “Obsidian and the Red Sea trade: prehistoric aspects, in MLTaddei (od) 
“Souk Alon Archaeology 1987. 1 (Proceedings of he Ninth International Conference 
ofthe Aswelarion of South Aslan Archaeologist in Western Europe), 0-41. Rome: 
tuts Malian per 1l Medi ed Estremo Oriente. Serie Ofientale Roma 66, 1 

Ziermann, M. (1993) Elephantine XY1. Befestigunptanlagen und Stactennictlng in der 
‘Fiiksel und in fiilhen alien Reich, Mainz am Rhein: von Zabe. AVDAIK $1. 


INDEX 


Page numbers in bold refer to figures 
Au Rwrnth 71, 76, 225, 362; 
abject form 150, 283, 291 
Aur 7e, 80, S1, 150, 360-1 
Caen B S3, 58, 284: 
Cemetery U 31-2, 40, 48, 57, 188, 227 
erman at 3 3 19-20, 22-3, 25-6, 88: 
a 
Um ekat 
Abydos south 104, 278 
SAecessien and earamlion, ceremonies carmeciad wit 6%, 209-10 
e 
Aa, King 57,66, 70-1, 202 
Sd cul practices 366, 380, 281, 301-2; 


O E 
nb eampler ofS, 0.i. AS 
Aen (oie) 102 
Aks ofc) 73, 131, 146 
Anedjih, King 78-9, 212 230: 
mex and bilez of O, SO 
royal eongraphy ISN, 275, 276 
annals (Cairo fragment) 65; 
af Den 6, 71, 216, 275,281, 284, 289, 204, 298, 08, 2: 
fashioning of divine images 68, 287, 291, 294; 
gaan hiaeical sounce S0, 61-6: 
ea ily eklê; 
A dein IOS, 37M, SIS 
Auli (ûetty) 148 262, 261, 280-1, 297 
ED 
the Predyrastic period 10: 
eken mcriptlons near 5%, 84, 173, 174; 
daheine 308, 31 Ia 
Aff (deity) 99, 117, 189, 263, 282 


$, 110, 132, 133, 116 


shrine 306, 315 

e 

E 

gg inl Dyrery mab & 32,35 
E 
potery from excavations at 35, 69, H6, 2; 
IS 


Sn tI 260 0 

bal sca kale ofa cırpeniy 32, 30-1 
"rave good 30, 158, 182, 280: 
SSbjecls fom rmyal torbe 72, 74, 81, 188; 
ESTES 

Capo 3, 164, 368, 290, 310, 313, 351-2 

era speciallanion W-6, 324 


Dek seograply and xetlamnen 339-40, 362 
ermen oI 181,182, 18 are 
nd religiousealts 207-8, 300: 
yal acts I, IZ 2I4) 216, 221, 305, 325; 

Dende 57 f 

divine hamge 222, 367-9 
eunogrnphy of 180, 215 
religious cults 281, 297 298, 319, 320; 
SSmidluy burial surrounding toh of 28, 291, 295 

let King T8 a 1ê, 303, 201: 

md religious culls 296, 297 

nb of 1920. 7,39, 339-6, A: 
"Dymasty O 53-4, 61, 6ë: 

Socket mucriptions of I73 177 


Early Dyamtie period, definition &0-1 
detern deat 34, 0, 6T 16 T1, 206: 
‘sockeeul mreeipions €2. 6 
Sele 44, 54 165 
Heparin Ir 
‘and ihe carly sate 118, L1, 180, 278-9, 329, 344, 46; 
agian AS E 
sseakimpreaions ioe 00, 91, 97, 9%, 100, 330: 
deban 25 156 


eku 30 
En etar 24, 71, TF. HA, 151, S14, 188, 157, 180 


ON 

er alee Ste aire 
Aa Bt HR A MS 
yr 

ernkeapolis “Fort 93, 227, 246, 277: 


at Saqgar 7, 104, 239-40, 241-4, 254 


Geb ae 284 
de Prepac canine 0; 
astaka V 73, 4,165 


tile, Cairo 16, 18 


haraaphes (deity) 221, 282, 284-5 
inther (dey) 15, 93, 97, 109, 262, 283, 204, 311-12: 
Hayes we crown 
Medpwer (deley) 340 288-6 
Frly Dyewaie necropolis 12,25,76, 115, 285, 267, 286, 339, 182, 360-1: 
emeka toflienl) F7, 121, 131, T47, 275 
Hemka (oficial) N0 
eqe (ely 
Hemel, Queen 291 


esir (oficial) 97, 141, 161, 298 
etepdsef (otel), tue ofS, S4, 242 
Melepsethemuy King S2 Y4; 


ısenlkimpressions of 90, 116, 240, 296; 
‘Buildings of Khasethermlory) st 91, 92, 184, 191,272,277, 204, 309, 312 
Seer ales hanerary celonuree) 
Eenvatons t6 FTI N 
Locally 2, 39, 30, 161, 116, 45; 
"Nain Depot 7, 77. 164 198, 270, 300-10 
Searpin mcehesdk: 
aad cme formation 14-9, 48,06, 47, 48, 40, S0, S1: 
Semple (at Neken) 30, 26%, 271, 304, 306, 09 11 
maren 74,80, 4 7 
un develapenen 321,324, 326, 333-5, 160 
huning the 13, 216-17, 274 
Hors (deiy) 198, 264, 286-7, 202: 
Cw aod of kingship 30,48 30, It-S, 284, 10: 
human kocrilie 227, 217, 240, 165 
Sle pyrite FIO, OY T1 37 9, 2m N0: 


tame (ûeity) 287 
teuevenaphy 

‘reigious 262 4, 263, 279; 
smlotep (oficlal) 15, 99, 131, 244, 273, 295 


his (deity) 28 8 
return offical) M4, 284, 43 


Kiana, King %5, 99-101, 104, 207, 34: 
‘ser alae ZawiyetekıAnyan ‘layer pyramid 
Î 
Kharekhem, King S2 S1, 91-2, 96, 170, 180, 191, 272: 
kltekhemmwy, King SI 1, 202, 250, 273: 
ıcbjecls fom the tomb of LR, 282, 291, 296, 297, 315; 
dl he Second Third Dynasty mucin 95, 101, 211, 248; 
sand temple balding 294, 103, 308 310 11, 312, 33: 
EEELOOTED 
Khentiamentîu (deity) 262, 288, 297, 313 
Kaun (dey) 361, 248 
Kham (deny) 198, 199 
Has belor the Fit Dynasty 19, S28, 65, 66: 
ser alee ‘Dyeay O: 
Seely centres of 36-41, 38 
colo of 7,30, 31A, A, 47, 48, S8, 117, 183-220, 274 


Mafe (deity) 77, 220, 263, 288-90, 289 
Manelho 4, 60, 63, 64, 66, 67, 231, 292 

E 

anid royal ritual 210, 214, 216; 

Merka (official) 111, 135, 136, 137, 143, 148-9, 291, 299 
ا‎ 

tom of 74, 75, 90, 233,2 
3 

andthe northward spreud of Upper Egyptian ceramic styles 35-6; 


adage 64. 187 
Mf lermon 154, 158 


Nahal Tilak 24, 44, 69, 154 

bauen 77,48, 2: 
as Prediynastic centre 37-8, 44, 47,49, 2: 
gion SOE 
yearlabelek: 
lena to mie of*Dyeuty O 84 S1 
‘and spect o rey iernogrphy 190, 194, 197, 199; 
depiedon ofeoun aflicak o I46, 137; 


imerpmention of 3, 49, 51, 68, 69, 185 
ad spect of rya tenseraply I90, 101, 194, 197, 190; 
TEE 
depiction of cpu oficial o 136, 137 


cc mncepiae o 169 I7 
necropolis seals of Dem and Qan 19, 26, 62, 63, 64, 74, 78, 288 
Nell (hey) 14%, 193, 221-2, 291-2, 306, 320 
Neil hoten, Queen 68, 70, 291 


mh of 6, 37, 70, 164, 224, 225, 231, 307 

Nekin Cel) 392, 297: 
dexpedilon tote Sims 168, 300 
ew alte Simail 
Keracarapy ol 192, 196 
Geer alue Step Pyramid euenplex, relief panelek: 
hihe order of muecemiun 26, 94, 101, 102: 
ee als Heliopok Third Dynasty sheine 
dee alas Sep Pyramid complex 

Nimasthap, Qucen 4,95, 9F 

Niner King S7. Sr 
iornography of 189, 
ddl religious cult 28I, 282 285, 202: 


Nomis Saqgara, tc unis 10, 72. 76, 80, 220, 264, 60-1 
eewaton ol TTI 15 16e 
‘Canlncts with iy 39-40, 49, 175-82, AS: 
Boi agree toran TI S2, IT, 221 32 
a 


ose 28, 22 


24-9, 226, 22 258 


Bayi coloniuation of 24,44, S1, 152-3, 180: 

ln cari mle 1, Th, 1SS, 1k 

‘comumemcsive 31,40,62, 190, 197, 218, 297, 310, 314; 
ferme (oficial) 110, 122, 129, 130, 131, 132, 137, 134, 136, 140, 14 
elicn Jet 
Peebnen, King 6, 10 90 

mes and Niles of 38 2-3, 295 
mal Gacy) 361, 281, 292-3 

Sep Tye compen: 

Zw dA 
refen u cele aharlile 251, 288, 26 

Ffxeace to delek pencral 264, 288 388 395, 3015 


aa source for tmterperting the Siep Pyramid comple 4% 


rocket inscriptions Of 292, 133; 

tomb of 26, 80-1, 237-8, 257 

ا 
E‏ 
a‏ 


Ro (diy) 84, 273, 203 
an ae of royal regalia 102, 192-4, 211,274, 275, 20 
regain yal 186 96 
aracepre: 
a ENE 


royal nares S1, 7, %8 100, 200-8 
cariemaion ol 235, 236, 256, 257: 
Shaler of 40, 130 1, 23 285 
n ren, Sao Dray cag tal 
Seahenkhet cg prea comples of. 
Sep Pyramid compen: 
Drm ek unt: 
ETRE EE 


o redan cere S0, 325, 61: 
rand sdrminisrtiod 128, 132, 134; 
expeditions tthe Sima 164, 167 
ew alte Simei 
Sagar 
Stemi cer Son Saqgeni 
Sean Dram rojave HSS B, 142, 330, 240-3, 201, 203, 280-1, 284, 29, 
Sekhanihet ep pyran complex of 
Sep Pyramid copier 
sel Gey) SF 
possible tomb of 3, 56, AS 
‘and aspects of yel ieoaography 46, 56, 111, 185, 191, 194: 
Sdepieboa o staniards om 197, 19%0, 290, 204; 
secda he T36, 139 33 
Sel (deity 281, 204, 26 


1, s4, 1, o; 


i temple decoration 105, 312 316: 
e gen Yam complet 
Sekhemiaued (otela) T2, 146-7 
Seahenkhes King ot, 9% 0 16% 
de pyramid camper of 14, 88, 99, 162, 243, 247, 282-3; 


‘and aimininion 116, 121, 124; 


religion 81, 28, Jes, Jol, e, oo; 


seed Ks SES, 
ETE 
seh (dey) 200-5, 28, 

Slionhip wal other delies 382 84, 202, 203: 

ia royal iconography 197. 19%, 19%; 

repal lary 2, $9, 302 20, 207 
Shu (deity) 295 
Sunet ez Hebb 23, 93, 228, 5-6: 

‘Bouts necm! 25, 160, 257: 

as precunec of Step Pyramid coropien 95, 49; 

ETE 

Taylan aggre again T1, 157, 206; 

Hilorapl o Wo Magan ascitic 102, 192, 196, 201, 300; 

en ak I55: 

&nqeoike mining expeditions to Wadi Mahar €2, 97, 90, 102, 134, 140, 183-4, 163, 172 
Saefka, King S2 U 
STE 
akar ey) IT, 296 


EES 
‘Step Pyramid carpe (of Nejerithel 8-6, 228, 207-52: 
SERermaian and restora of 9-10, 1314 
sand developement n soyal moraanry arehiieetare 17, 23, 93, 231, 238, 246, 259 
Snctone und symbol of 258, 27: 
weler beret the Weer Masî znd North Court 84, 88, 89, 242: 
imerihed stone vessels fromm 62, 77, K6, 87, K9, 90, 91, 263, 275, 279, 285, 288, 294, 296, 43; 
kef panel Rom 1O4, 1A, 189, 190, 199, 276, 277, 285, 287, 290; 
Sra Egypt coalacts wilh 21,41, 1S: 


|5, 209, 01: 


‘êle Frnt Dymasty enastatay a T5, 225, 324; 
iacriptions oa S1, 57 SK, 60, 0F 
Tatan 206a, SIZ Ist 
Tell Aral 41, 6%, 154, Tl 168 
shrine 270,306, 316-17 
س‎ 
Thi 2o0, 126. 1643 
‘ae hone diy of Finn Dymasly O1, 231: 
region capital 40, 392 
dand sie ormmtion 4,47 S1, S2 


“Theth (ely) 198, 264, 297 
sh Uj (Abydos 19, 3, 40-3, 46, 256: 
"as erllence for tale formic 4%, S0, S1: 
Wi he Near Ean Ey Dyzatie 18,60, 71, 72, 74, 77, 0, 81, 157-62, 364: 
ith the Near East, Prednis 21, 36 6, 41-2, 43, 46,47, 113, 1S1, 240, A1, 363: 
th Nuts 20,43, IS, 45 AS 
Scriptom ot 84, 55, S6, 69, 72 
“and the Third Dynasty 9, 95, %6, 98, 99, 102, 103, 254, 279 


Ur Qun 4 17,4, 97,227, 229, 210, 292, 250, 
Tis Dynasty rojal lone 231 1 
fen RN SPAS asa, 264, 360 
an I2 300 
Bion auencing 0, 120-6 


ive oflerins 364, 268, 260-72, 24, 298, 200 
‘hom Arydoe $, 40, 1o, 270 1, 2û, IS SIA-18, 
Som Flpbantine 18, 308; 

{eee ale erakonpolis ‘Main Deposit 


li Dn E 
al Dg a 60 
n Don Shi 172 
Wle Clef) 222, 284, 292, 297: 
ei enr Dial 
eres O o0, ant 
Wepre ley) 192. 26, 297-8 
standard of 102, 167, 191, 192, 197, 198, 199, 00 
OEE 
eck lateipioke Ca, 18 
ae Aen Of roye roll 39, 91, 1903, 202,211, 278 
iting, curly 14, 19; 41, 42, 44-6, S2, 112, 318, 319, HO 


year lahele €2, 9, 81, 204: 
Saf Sarmer 28, 68, f; 


Fin Dya cermteny 69, 71, 362: 


